This is an alphabetical list of people who have made significant contributions in the fields of system analysis and control theory. [ Active researchers ] Name Institution Nationality Contributions Field Awards Tamer Basar University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign [decision.csl.uiuc.edu/~tbasar/ Tammer Basar] Works on dynamic games, control and communication theory, etc. Karl Johan Åström - Lund University Karl Johan Åström Author of five books, including Introduction to Stochastic Control Theory (1970 and Dover, 2006) and (with Wittenmark) of Adaptive Control (Addison-Wesley, 1995). Michael Athans MIT Michael Athans Co-author of the book Optimal Control, (McGraw-Hill, 1966). Developed applications of LQ]/LTR control to helicopters and submarines. Works on optimal control and system estimation. John Baillieul Boston University John Baillieul Works on robotics, mechanical system control and non-holonomic constraints. Ross Barmish University of Wisconsin–Madison B. Ross Barmish Author of New Tools for Robustness of Linear Systems (Macmillan, 1994). Two IFAC prizes for papers on robust control. Bo Bernhardsson Lund University Bo Bernhardsson Currently working at Ericsson Mobile Platforms. Stephen P. Boyd Stanford University Stephen P. Boyd Works on engineering applications of convex optimization. Winner of John R. Ragazzini Award in control systems. Damiano Brigo Imperial College Damiano Brigo Works on nonlinear filtering (jointly introduced with Bernard Hanzon and François Le Gland the projection filters). Roger W. Brockett Harvard University Roger W. Brockett Works on dynamics and control of smart structures. William L. Brogan University of Nevada at Las Vegas Author of book Modern Control Theory. ISBN 0-13-589763-7 Jie Chen UC Riverside Jie Chen Co-author of Control-Oriented System Identification: An H-infinity Approach (Wiley Interscience, 2000) and Stability of Time-Delay Systems (Birkhauser, 2003). John C. Doyle Caltech John C. Doyle Co-author of (with Zhou and Glover) Robust and Optimal Control (Prentice Hall, 1996), Essentials of Robust Control (1997), and Feedback Control Theory (Macmillan, 1992). Olav Egeland NTNU Olav Egeland Co-author of Modeling and Simulation for Automatic Control (Marine Cybernetics, 2002). Works on marine applications of control. Thor I. Fossen NTNU Thor I. Fossen Author of &quot; Guidance and Control of Ocean Vehicles &quot; (Wiley, 1994) and Marine Control Systems (Marine Cybernetics, 2002). Works on marine applications of control. Jim Freudenberg University of Michigan Jim Freudenberg Works on linear multivariable feedback systems. Laurent El Ghaoui UC Berkeley Laurent El Ghaoui Works on decision-making under uncertainty, convex optimization. Andrea Gombani CNR Andrea Gombani Specializes in identification and parametrization of stochastic linear systems, robust control. Karolos Grigoriadis University of Houston Karolos Grigoriadis Co-author of A Unified Algebraic Approach to Linear Control Design (Taylor &amp; Francis, 1998). Has worked on control of the Hubble space telescope. Per Hagander Lund University Per Hagander Works with linear system theory and with applications in biotechnology and medicine. Anders Hansson Linköping University Anders Hansson Works in many areas including semidefinite programming, convex optimization, model predictive control, design of gain scheduled controllers. Bernard Hanzon University College Cork Works on nonlinear filtering (jointly introduced with Damiano Brigo and François Le Gland the projection filters), and on algebraic methods in systems theory. Malo Hautus Eindhoven University of Technology Malo Hautus Co-author of Control Theory for Linear Systems (Springer Verlag, 2001). Yu-Chi &quot; Larry &quot; Ho Harvard University Y.C. Ho Co-author of Applied Optimal Control (1969, 1975), the most cited book on the subject. Since 1983 he has been working on discrete event system theory. Christopher V. Hollot UMass Amherst Christopher V. Hollot A generalist on the theory and application of feedback control systems. Tony Holohan Dublin City University Tony Holohan Works in robust control and multivariable feedback. Diederich Hinrichsen University of Bremen Diederich Hinrichsen developed a comprehensive theory of linear systems and with A.J. Pritchard a fundamental robustness theory of dynamical systems. Author (with A.J. Pritchard) of Mathematical Systems Theory I. Modelling, State Space Analysis, Stability and Robustness, (Springer Verlag, 2005) Jie Huang Chinese University of Hong Kong Jie Huang Developed mathematical foundation for nonlinear output regulation. Alberto Isidori Washington University in St. Louis Alberto Isidori Introduced geometric methods into non-linear control. Author of: Nonlinear Control Systems (Springer Verlag, 1995). Thomas Kailath Stanford University Thomas Kailath Author of Linear Systems (Prentice Hall, 1980) and co-author of Linear Estimation (Prentice Hall, 2000). Rudolf Kalman R E Kalman Pioneered the state-space approach to systems and control. Introduced the notions of controllability and observability. Developed the Kalman filter for linear estimation. Chris Kirtley Curtin University of Technology Chris Kirtley Medical doctor. Author of a book on clinical gait analysis. Petar V. Kokotovic UC Santa Barbara Petar V. Kokotovic Works on nonlinear control, both adaptive and robust. He initiated the development of back-stepping (a popular, recusrsive, design technique). Industry consultant on control of car and jet engines. Vladimir Kucera Czech Technical University in Prague, Vladimir Kucera Works on algebraic methods for control design. Author of the book Discrete Linear Control: The Polynomial Equation Approach. (Wiley, 1979). Alan J. Laub UCLA, Alan J. Laub Works on numerical algorithms and software for control design. Author of the book Matrix Analysis for Scientists and Engineers (SIAM, 2005). Moonyong Lee Yeungnam University PSDC Homepage Adviser of Process Systems Design and Control Laboratory. Working on IMC based Optimal Design of Industrial Three Term Controllers, Robust Analytical Design of Multi-loop PID Controllers, Optimization Based Controller Design for Constrained Optimal Control, Advanced Control for Thermally Coupled Distillation Process, Real-time Monitoring and Control Software Package, Optimal Design of Thermally Coupled Distillation Process Including Divided Wall Column. Lennart Ljung Linkoping University, Lennart Ljung Author of System identification - Theory for the user (Prentice Hall, 1999) and 12 other books. Fellow IEEE. Jan Maciejowski Cambridge University Jan Maciejowski Works on model predictive control and fault-tolerant control. Author of two books: Predictive Control with Constraints (Prentice Hall, 2002) and Multivariable Feedback Design (Addison-Wesley, 1989). Michel Malabre Université de Nantes Michel Malabre Works on structural linear control theory and implicit systems. Juan Carlos Martínez-García Cinvestav Juan Carlos Martínez-García Works on failure detection and systems biology. David Q. Mayne Imperial College D. Q. Mayne Works on differential dynamic programming, adaptive control and model predictive control. Mehran Mesbahi University of Washington Mehran Mesbahi Works on networks, distributed robotics, aerospace GN &amp; C, and optimization. Co-author of the book &quot; Graph Theoretic Methods in Multiagent Networks &quot; (Princeton, 2010). Geert Jan Olsder Delft University Geert Jan Olsder Formerly worked on optimal control, game theory and filter theory, more recently works in discrete event system theory. Ian Petersen Australian Research Council Ian Petersen Professorial Fellow. Co-author of two books: Robust Kalman Filtering For Signals and Systems with Large Uncertainties and Robust Control Design using H-infinity Methods (Springer Verlag, 2000). Mario Rotea Purdue University Mario Rotea Works on optimization and control of dynamical systems, especially as applied to mechanical and aerospace problems. Ali Saberi Washington State University Ali Saberi Works on nonlinear control, adaptive control and other areas. Author of software for control system design. Jan H. van Schuppen Free University of Amsterdam and CWI Jan van Schuppen is author of more than one hundred publications in control theory, system identification, realization theory and filtering. Bahram Shafai Northeastern University Bahram Shafai Author of Computer-Aided Analysis and Design of Linear Control Systems (Prentice Hall, 1992). Robert E. Skelton UC San Diego Robert E. Skelton Works on dynamics and control of ‘tensegrity systems’. Sigurd Skogestad NTNU Sigurd Skogestad Works on process control. Co-author of Multivariable Feedback Control-Analysis and design (Wiley, 1996, 2005). Eduardo D. Sontag Rutgers University Eduardo D. Sontag Studied under R. Kalman. Author of Mathematical Control Theory: Deterministic Finite Dimensional Systems (Springer, 1998). Introduced the notion of a &apos;control Lyapunov function&apos; (CLF). James C. Spall Johns Hopkins University James C. Spall Works on stochastic systems, including estimation and optimization. Author of Introduction to Stochastic Search and Optimization (Wiley, 2003). S. S. Sritharan Naval Postgraduate School S. S. Sritharan ( Developed Deterministic and Stochastic Control Theory and nonlinear filtering for Fluid Dynamics and MHD using Navier-Stokes equations and magnetohydrodynamic equations as state space models). Anton Stoorvogel Eindhoven University of Technology Anton Stoorvogel Author of The H-infinity control problem: a state space approach (Prentice-Hall, 1992), and co-author of Control of linear systems with regulation and input constraints, (Springer Verlag, 2000) and Control theory for linear systems (Springer Verlag, 2001). Jakob Stoustrup Aalborg University Jakob Stoustrup Works on loop-transfer recovery, gain scheduled control, fault tolerant control and several other areas. Gang Tao University of Virginia Gang Tao Author of 5 books including Adaptive control design and analysis (Wiley, 2003). Masayoshi Tomizuka University of California Masayoshi Tomizuka Contributed to theories and applications of adaptive control, computer-aided manufacturing, control systems and theory, digital control, dynamic systems, manufacturing, and mechanical vibrations. (Information storage systems, automated highway systems) Harry L. Trentelman University of Groningen Co-author of the book Control Theory for Linear Systems (Springer Verlag, 2001), Contributions to the geometric approach to linear systems, H-infinity control, linear quadratic optimal control, and the behavioral approach to systems and control. Paul Van den Hof Delft University Paul Van den Hof Works on the wide area of identification and model-based control of dynamical systems, with applications in industrial processes, mechanical servo systems and physical measurement systems. Michel Verhaegen Delft University Michel Verhaegen Works on control of adaptive optics, control of wind turbines. Mathukumalli Vidyasagar University of Texas at Dallas Mathukumalli Vidyasagar Professor of Systems Biology Science at the University of Texas at Dallas. Author of Nonlinear systems analysis (Prentice Hall, 1993 and SIAM, 2002). Kevin Warwick University of Reading Kevin Warwick Developed the first state-space based self-tuning controller, now involved more in application studies of feedback control, particularly where a human is part of the system. Stephen Yurkovich University of Texas at Dallas Fellow of the IEEE, and holds the Louis Beecherl Jr. Distinguished Chair in Engineering at the University of Texas at Dallas, where he is also Program Head of Systems Engineering. Jan C. Willems University of Groningen Jan C. Willems Author of The analysis of feedback systems (1971). Worked on LQ control, dissipative systems and linear matrix inequalities. Co-author of Introduction to mathematical system theory – a behavioral approach (Wiley, 1998), where the behavioral approach is a representation free way to discuss system dynamics. Björn Wittenmark Lund University Björn Wittenmark Works in many areas including process control and adaptive control. Co-author of two books with Åström. Yutaka Yamamoto Kyoto University Yutaka Yamamoto Author of the book Repetitive Control (in Japanese) and a large number of research, survey and tutorial articles. Fellow of the IEEE. Michael Zeitz University of Stuttgart Michael Zeitz Working on nonlinear observation and control. For the latter, he is especially concerned with differential flatness and system inversion of dynamical systems. He also developed the Extended Luenberger Observer as well as the Observability Normal Form for nonlinear systems. Kemin Zhou Louisiana State University Kemin Zhou Co-author (with Doyle and Glover) of the book Robust and optimal control (Prentice-Hall, 1996). [ Historical figures in systems and control ] These people have made outstanding contributions to systems and control, but are no longer active. William Ross Ashby Made many early contributions to cybernetics and complex systems, such as the concept of variety (cybernetics). Richard Bellman Developed Dynamic programming (1953). Harold S. Black Invented the negative feedback amplifier (1927). Hendrik Bode Published Network Analysis and Feedback Amplifier Design (Van Nostrand, 1945), invented the Bode plot and introduced the Bode integral formula. Nikolay Bogoliubov together with Nikolay Krylov developed the describing function method as an approximate procedure for analyzing nonlinear control problems. Leonhard Euler Developed the Laplace transform, the main tool for analyzing LTI systems. His Euler-Lagrange equation is the basis for model predictive control. Walter R. Evans Developed the root locus method for feedback design. Joseph Fourier Introduced the Fourier series, allowing analysis in the frequency domain. Ernst A. Guillemin Developed techniques for analysis and synthesis of networks of RLC components. Harold Hazen Author of Theory of Servomechanisms, 1934. Andrey Kolmogorov Co-developer of the Wiener-Kolmogorov filter. Formulated the Kolmogorov forward and backward equations in the theory of stochastic processes. Nikolay Krylov together with Nikolay Bogoliubov developed the describing function method as an approximate procedure for analyzing nonlinear control problems. Alexander Lyapunov His paper Sur le probleme general de la stabilite du mouvement (1892) (in French) marks the beginning of stability theory. Nicolas Minorsky Ship designer, was the first to provide an analysis of the three term (or PID ) controller and to suggest its use for ship steering (1922). Nathaniel B. Nichols Developed the Nichols chart. Published Theory of Servomechanisms with H. M. James and R. S. Phillips, 1947. Harry Nyquist Developed the Nyquist stability criterion for feedback systems (1932) and co-developed Nyquist–Shannon sampling theorem (1927). Lev Semenovich Pontryagin Main author of Pontryagin&apos;s minimum principle for optimal control problems. Vasile M. Popov Developed the Kalman–Yakubovich–Popov lemma and the Popov criterion for stability. John R. Ragazzini His book Sampled-data control systems, 1954, introduced digital control and the z-transform. Edward John Routh Early theorist, developed Routh-Hurwitz theorem and Routh-Hurwitz stability criterion. Claude E. Shannon Developed information theory and pioneered switching theory. John Tukey Developed the Fast Fourier Transform algorithm, which made frequency analysis easy to implement. Norbert Wiener Co-developer of the Wiener-Kolmogorov filter. Coined the term Cybernetics. Studied the stochastic process known as the Wiener process. Charles H. Wilts Caltech professor, author of New electric analog computers and their application to aircraft design problems (1953) and Principles of Feedback Control (1960). Charles Wilts Rock climber. Vladimir Andreevich Yakubovich Saint Petersburg State University Pioneered the usage of Linear Matrix Inequalities in control theory. History of LMIs in Control Theory Considered as the father of the field. George Zames McGill University Developed robust control theory, including the small gain theorem and H infinity control. [ See also ] List of engineers List of systems engineers List of systems scientists [ References ] [ 2 ] [ External links ] People in control, in: Control Systems Magazine, IEEE, Volume 24, Issue 5, Oct. 2004 pp 12–15. ISA, the International Society for Measurement and Control, homepage. Category:Lists of people