{ Catechol } { dopamine } { norepinephrine (noradrenaline) } { epinephrine (adrenaline) } A catecholamine (CA) is an organic compound that has a catechol ( benzene with two hydroxyl side groups) and a side-chain amine. [ Fitzgerald, P. A. Chapter 11. Adrenal Medulla and Paraganglia Gardner D. G. Shoback D. Greenspan’s Basic &amp; Clinical Endocrinology 9th New York McGraw-Hill 2011 http://www.accessmedicine.com/content.aspx?aID%3D8404198 October 26, 2011 ] A catechol is a 1,2-dihydroxybenzene group. Catecholamines derive [ May 2012 ] from the amino acid tyrosine. [ Purves, D.; Augustine, G. J.; Fitzpatrick, D.; Hall, W. C.; LaMantia, A. S.; McNamara, J. O.; White, L. E. Neuroscience 4th Sinauer Associates 137 –8 2008 978-0-87893-697-7 ] Catecholamines are water-soluble and are 50%-bound to plasma proteins, so they circulate in the bloodstream. In the human body, the most abundant catecholamines are epinephrine (adrenaline), norepinephrine (noradrenaline) and dopamine, all of which are produced from phenylalanine and tyrosine. Release of the hormone s epinephrine and norepinephrine from the adrenal medulla of the adrenal gland s is part of the fight-or-flight response. [ http://myhealth.ucsd.edu/library/healthguide/en-us/support/topic.asp?hwid%3Dte7424 University of California San Diego Health Library Catecholamines ] Tyrosine is created from phenylalanine by hydroxylation by the enzyme phenylalanine hydroxylase. Tyrosine is also ingested directly from dietary protein. It is then sent to catecholamine-secreting neurons. Here, several reactions serially convert tyrosine to L-DOPA, to dopamine, to norepinephrine, and eventually to epinephrine. [ Joh, T. H.; Hwang, O. Dopamine Beta-Hydroxylase: Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 493 342–350 1987 3473965 10.1111/j.1749-6632.1987.tb27217.x ] Various stimulant drugs are catecholamine analogues. [ Structure ] Catecholamines have the distinct structure of a benzene ring with two hydroxyl groups, an intermediate ethyl chain, and a terminal amine group. Phenylethanolamines such as norepinephrine have a hydroxyl group on the ethyl chain. [ Production and degradation ] [ Location ] Catecholamines are produced mainly by the chromaffin cells of the adrenal medulla and the postganglionic fiber s of the sympathetic nervous system. Dopamine, which acts as a neurotransmitter in the central nervous system, is largely produced in neuronal cell bodies in two areas of the brainstem: the substantia nigra and the ventral tegmental area.The similarly melanin -pigmented cell bodies of the locus ceruleus produce norepinephrine. [ Synthesis ] Dopamine is the first catecholamine synthesized from DOPA. In turn, norepinephrine and epinephrine are derived from further metabolic modification of dopamine. The enzyme dopamine hydroxylase requires copper as a cofactor (not shown) and DOPA decarboxylase requires PLP (not shown). The rate limiting step in catecholamine biosynthesis is hydroxylation of tyrosine. Catecholamine synthesis. Catecholamine synthesis is inhibited by alpha-methyl-p-tyrosine ( AMPT ), which inhibits tyrosine hydroxylase. [ February 2012 ] [ Degradation ] Catecholamines have a half-life of a few minutes when circulating in the blood. They can be degraded either by methylation by catechol-O-methyltransferases ( COMT ) or by deamination by monoamine oxidases ( MAO ). Amphetamines and MAOI s bind to MAO in order to inhibit its action of breaking down catecholamines. This is the primary reason why the effects of amphetamines have a longer lifespan than those of cocaine and other substances. Amphetamines not only cause a release of dopamine, epinephrine, and norepinephrine into the blood stream but also suppress re-absorption. [ Function ] [ Modality ] Two catecholamines, norepinephrine and dopamine, act as neuromodulators in the central nervous system and as hormones in the blood circulation. The catecholamine norepinephrine is a neuromodulator of the peripheral sympathetic nervous system but is also present in the blood (mostly through &quot; spillover &quot; from the synapse s of the sympathetic system). High catecholamine levels in blood are associated with stress, which can be induced from psychological reactions or environmental stressors such as elevated sound levels, intense light, or low blood sugar levels. Extremely high levels of catecholamines (also known as catecholamine toxicity) can occur in central nervous system trauma due to stimulation and/or damage of nuclei in the brainstem, in particular those nuclei affecting the sympathetic nervous system. In emergency medicine, this occurrence is widely known as catecholamine dump. Extremely high levels of catecholamine can also be caused by neuroendocrine tumor s in the adrenal medulla, a treatable condition known as pheochromocytoma. High levels of catecholamines can also be caused by monoamine oxidase A (MAO-A) deficiency. MAO-A is one of the enzymes responsible for degradation of these neurotransmitters, thus its deficiency increases the bioavailability of them considerably. It occurs in the absence of pheochromocytoma, neuroendocrine tumors, and carcinoid syndrome, but it looks similar to carcinoid syndrome such as facial flushing and aggression. [ Manor I. Tyano S. Mel E. Eisenberg J. Bachner-Melman R. Kotler M. Ebstein R. P. Family-Based and Association Studies of Monoamine Oxidase A and Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD): Preferential Transmission of the Long Promoter-Region Repeat and its Association with Impaired Performance on a Continuous Performance Test (TOVA) Molecular Psychiatry 7 6 626–632 2002 12140786 10.1038/sj.mp.4001037 ] [ Brunner, H. G. MAOA Deficiency and Abnormal Behaviour: Perspectives on an Association Ciba Foundation Symposium 194 155–164; discussion 164–167 1996 8862875 ] [ Effects ] Catecholamines cause general physiological changes that prepare the body for physical activity ( fight-or-flight response ). Some typical effects are increases in heart rate, blood pressure, blood glucose levels, and a general reaction of the sympathetic nervous system. Some drugs, like tolcapone (a central COMT -inhibitor), raise the levels of all the catecholamines. [ Function in plants ] &quot; They have been found in 44 plant families, but no essential metabolic function has been established for them. They are precursors of benzo[c]phenanthridine alkaloid s, which are the active principal ingredients of many medicinal plant extracts. CAs have been implicated to have a possible protective role against insect predators, injuries, and nitrogen detoxification. They have been shown to promote plant tissue growth, somatic embryogenesis from in vitro cultures, and flowering. CAs inhibit indole-3-acetic acid oxidation and enhance ethylene biosynthesis. They have also been shown to enhance synergistically various effects of gibberellin s. &quot; [ Kuklin, A. I.; Conger, B. V. Catecholamines in Plants Journal of Plant Growth Regulation 14 2 1995 10.1007/BF00203119 91–97 ] [ See also ] Catechol-O-methyl transferase Hormone Julius Axelrod Phenethylamine s Steroid hormone Peptide hormone Sympathomimetics Vanillylmandelic acid Catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia [ References ] [ External links ] [ Catecholamines ] Category:Neurotransmitters ar:كاتيكولامين bg:Катехоламини ca:Catecolamina cs:Katecholamin de:Katecholamine es:Catecolamina eu:Katekolamina fa:کاتکول آمین fr:Catécholamine gl:Catecolamina ko:카테콜아민 is:Katekólamín it:Catecolamina mk:Катехоламини nl:Catecholamine ja:カテコールアミン no:Katekolaminer pl:Katecholaminy pt:Catecolamina ru:Катехоламины sk:Katecholamín sl:Kateholamini sr:Kateholamin fi:Katekoliamiinit sv:Katekolamin tr:Katekolamin uk:Катехоламіни zh:儿茶酚胺