[ monarch Childeric III King of the Franks Jean Dassier (1676-1763) - Childéric III roy de France (754).jpg Childéric III (752). King of the Franks 743–752 Theuderic IV Pepin Theuderic Merovingian Dynasty about 717 about 754 ] Childeric III (c. 717 – c. 754) was the last King of the Franks in the Merovingian dynasty from 743 to his deposition by Pope Zachary in March 752. Once Childeric was deposed, the Pope crowned Pepin the Short, father of Charlemagne, the King of the Franks in Soissons. { Claudio Rendina &amp; Paul McCusker, The Popes: Histories and Secrets, (New York : 2002), pg 145 } The throne had been vacant for seven years when the mayors of the palace, Carloman and Pepin the Short, decided in 743 to recognize Childeric as king. Neither his parentage nor his relation to the Merovingian family are known for sure. His parentage is not clear. He may equally well have been either the son of Chilperic II or Theuderic IV. { Barbara H. Rosenwein, A Short History of the Middle Ages, (University of Toronto : 2009), pg 84 } He took no part in public business, which was directed, as previously, by the mayors of the palace. When, in 747, Carloman retired into a monastery, Pepin resolved to take the royal crown for himself. Pepin sent letters to Pope Zachary, asking whether the title of king belonged to the one who had exercised the power or the one with the royal lineage. The pope responded that the real power should have the royal title as well. In early March 752 Childeric was dethroned by Pope Zachary and tonsure d. { Charles Knight, The English Cyclopaedia: Volume IV, (London : 1867); pg 733 } His long hair was the symbol of his dynasty and thus the royal rights or magical powers; by cutting it, they divested him of all royal prerogatives. Once dethroned, he and his son Theuderic were placed in the monastery of Saint-Bertin or he in Saint-Omer and Theuderic in Saint-Wandrille. There are conflicts in information of when he exactly died with some references citing as early as 753 and other references saying it was as late as 758. Under the Carolingian s, he received bad press, being called a rex falsus, false king, despite the fact that it was Pepin through Popes Zachary and Stephen II who raised him to his throne. [ Artists&apos; impressions ] Unknown artist, 1876 Le dernier des Mérovingiens by Évariste Vital Luminais [ References ] [ Bibliography ] Junghans, W. Die Geschichte der fränkischen Konige Childerich und Clodovech. Göttingen, 1857. Chiflet, J. J., Anastasis Childerici I Francorum regis. Antwerp, 1655. Cochet, J. B. D. Le Tombeau de Childeric I, roi des Francs. Paris, 1859. Lavisse, E. Histoire de France, Vol. II. Paris, 1903. Wallace-Hadrill, J. M., translator. The Fourth Book of the Chronicle of Fredegar with its Continuations. Greenwood Press: Connecticut, 1960. Wallace-Hadrill, J. M. The Long-Haired Kings. London, 1962. Einhard. &apos;&apos;Annales Regni Francorum&apos;&apos;. [ Charles Martel (Acting) Interregnum ] [ King of the Franks 743–752 ] [ Pepin ] [ Childeric Iii ] Category:750s deaths Category:Frankish kings Category:Merovingian dynasty Category:8th-century rulers in Europe Category:Year of birth uncertain als:Childerich III. be:Хільдэрык III bg:Хилдерих III bs:Childeric III ca:Khilderic III de:Childerich III. es:Childerico III fa:شیلدریک سوم fr:Childéric III gl:Khilderico III ko:힐데리히 3세 hr:Hilderik III. it:Childerico III la:Childericus III lb:Childerich III. hu:III. Childerich frank király mk:Хилдерик III nl:Childerik III ja:キルデリク3世 no:Childerik III pl:Childeryk III pt:Childerico III ru:Хильдерик III sh:Hilderik III fi:Kilderik III sv:Childerik III yo:Childeric III zh:希爾德里克三世