Arrow fletches are a type of fin. A fin is a surface used for stability and/or to produce lift and thrust or to steer while traveling in water, air, or other fluid media, (in other words, a foil (fluid mechanics) ). The first use of the word was for the limbs of fish, but has been extended to include other animal limbs and man-made devices. Fins, as with other foils, operate in fluids such as water or air. { Spotted Dolphin The pectoral fin and dorsal fin of the dolphin contribute to its agility and speed in the water. Its tail is also recognizable as a fin. The pectoral fins are movable and used in maneuvering; the dorsal fin is fixed and contributes stability, and the tail is used for propulsion, as well as maneuvering. } Fins are seen both in nature and in manmade iterations. Swimming water animals such as fish and cetaceans actively use pectoral fins for maneuvering, and dorsal fins contribute stability as the animal swims, propelling and maneuvering with its tail, itself recognizable as a fin. The fin on fixed-wing aircraft is known as a vertical stabilizer. Fins are also seen used as e.g., fletching on arrow s and at the rear of some bombs, missile s, rocket s, and self-propelled torpedo es. These are typically &quot; planar &quot; (shaped like small wings), although grid fin s are sometimes used in specialized cases. Examples of fins include: Propeller s usually have a number of fins that work to translate torquing force to lateral thrust, thus propelling a ship. These are also called blades. In the case of high power application it is important to avoid cavitation, caused by excessive negative pressure, as this can cause noise, a loss of power, and damage to the propeller. For scuba divers&apos; fins, see swimfin. [ Surfboard fins ] In surfing, there are two major types of (typically stationary) surfboard fins ( hydrofoils ), and a host of illustrative issues. Both a skeg and &quot; rail fins &quot; stabilize the motion of the surfboard. They also contribute to the desired effect of converting the (kinetic energy) push of the sloped wave face combined with the rider&apos;s mass on the sloped wave face (potential energy) into redirected energy - lift ( lift (physics) ) - the surfer deflects his surfboard and fins off the water of the wave face (and/or vice-versa) to make forward progress across the wave face, or &quot; down the line, &quot; that is, parallel to the wave crest and beach - riding parallel to the crest (perpendicular to the pull of gravity down the wave&apos;s slope) in this way is known as &quot; trimming. &quot; Lift (aka &quot; drive &quot; ) from the board and its fin(s) is what enables all maneuvers in surfing. A &quot; skeg &quot; (an upright, streamlined, often raked keel ) typically denotes one centrally-mounted stabilizer foil mounted perpendicularly to the riding surface, at the rear of the surfboard. Smaller surfboard fins mounted near the edge (or &quot; rail &quot; ) of the surfboard are known as &quot; rail fins &quot; and are seen in multi-fin arrangements (often in combination with a similarly-sized central fin further back on the board). Rail fins enable high-performance surfing, and are most often &quot; single-foiled, &quot; with one flat side and one &quot; foiled &quot; side, as seen on an airfoil, for greater lift. A fin configuration with fins near the edge of the board stabilizes and contributes lift during turning maneuvers, which contributes to the board&apos;s ability to &quot; hold &quot; during turning maneuvers. Rail fins are often seen in addition to a central fin, but can be used without a central fin as well. Some of the most popular multi-fin configurations use two rail fins (a &quot; twin-fin &quot; ), two rail fins plus a similar-sized central fin mounted further back (e.g. a &quot; Thruster &quot; ), or four fins (a &quot; quad &quot; ). Rail fins are more or less engaged by the rider&apos;s heel and toes as they lean in the desired direction of their turn. As the rider does so, an &quot; inside &quot; rail fin sinks deeper and its angle of attack is increased, as is its lift-induced drag. Rail fins also add lift (known as &quot; drive &quot; ) in trim and with greater holding ability, enable steeper wave faces to be ridden and higher speed &quot; down the line. &quot; Rail fins are typically &quot; toed-in, &quot; that is, the leading edge of the fins are oriented toward the centerline of the surfboard, which decreases the angle of attack in trim, which makes it easier to initiate turns. &quot; Toeing in &quot; rail fins also adds drag on the &quot; outside &quot; fin, as its angle of attack is negative during trim or in a turn. These combined factors of toed-in rail fins cause several issues: drag on a toed-in outside rail fin can slow the board down in trim, but it can also give a braking effect during turns that is useful. The inside rail fin (and the board itself) can be &quot; pumped, &quot; attacked and re-attacked, by swerving up and down the face, causing acceleration down the line, or similarly pumped to achieve a desired trajectory through a multi-stage turn. At higher speeds, the drag off toed-in rail fins can cause surfboards to oscillate and become unstable - a phenomenon known as &quot; speed wobbles Most surfboards intended for larger waves are longer (to increase hull speed for paddling, wave-catching, and surfing), and as most shapers orient the rail fins toward the nose of the board, a longer board inherently results in reduced toe-in of rail fins, therefore less negative angle of attack, less oscillation, greater stability, and higher speeds. Rail fins also typically have some degree of &quot; cant, &quot; that is, are tilted out toward the rail they are adjacent to. This is a significant additional factor in lift at various attitudes, drag, and performance, as are the variables of other foils - including flexibility, thickness, and planform. Rail fins evolved into being and surged into popularity as riders ( Simon Anderson, most famously) sought a solution to two major performance issues of a central &quot; single &quot; fin - both related to engagement of the foil: For one, a centrally-mounted fin is tilted up out of the water as the board is leaned over, and thus it loses more and more of its lift as the lean angle increases - if the lean angle is acute enough, the fin&apos;s tip can be the only area left in the water; the tip may then rapidly stall and, having lost its lift, become disengaged from the water, leaving the board&apos;s bottom as the only control surface still operating. Before rail fins became (extremely) popular, this tendency of &quot; single fins &quot; led to riders &quot; nursing &quot; turns - this tendency was a significant limiting factor on performance. The enhanced hold offered by rail fins during turning led to more types of maneuvers being possible. The other major issue leading to rail fins&apos; use is the fact that a rider can use the lift near the rail to increase speed and performance on smaller waves due to the above effects and abilities of these foils. [ Warshaw Matt Encyclopedia of Surfing 1983 Houghton Mifflin Harcourt USA 0-15-100579-6 752 ] In Windsurfing, a derivative of traditional surfing, skegs are also often used as a central stabilizing fin ( hydrofoil ) located at the rear of the board. A windsurfer&apos;s skeg also has the effect of producing lift, which allows the rider to direct the craft laterally against the lift the sail (itself an airfoil ) produces. The skeg has undergone numerous phases of development and, as with other foils, its design is determined by the balance of the pressures it experiences in use, including lift, drag (physics), ventilation and stall (flight). [ References ] Category:Animal anatomy Category:Nautical terms bjn:Sinding de:Finne (Wassersport) es:Aleta fr:Ailette id:Sirip he:סנפיר (כלי) ja:鰭