[ the unincorporated community in Brown County La Grange, Brown County, Illinois ] [ Settlement La Grange Village LaGrange Village Hall exterior 02.jpg La Grange Village Hall United States Illinois Cook County Township 41 48 29 N 87 52 24 W 2.5 2.5 15608 2000 6220.7 Village president CST -6 CDT -5 60525 708 Illinois - outline map.svg Location of La Grange within Illinois Illinois - background map.png Illinois2 La Grange, Illinois ] The downtown district of La Grange, Illinois La Grange, a suburb of Chicago, is a village in Cook County, in the U.S. state of Illinois. The population was 15,608 at the 2000 census. [ History ] [ April 2012 ] The area around La Grange was first settled in the 1830s, when Chicago residents moved out to the west due to the rapid population increase in the city in the decade since its incorporation. The first settler, Robert Leitch, came to the area in 1830, seven years before the City of Chicago was incorporated. La Grange&apos;s location, at approximately thirteen miles from the Chicago Loop, is not considered far from the city by today&apos;s standards, but in that time the residents enjoyed the peace of rural life without much communication with urban residents. The village was officially incorporated on June 11, 1879. It was founded by Franklin Dwight Cossitt, who was born in Granby, Connecticut and raised in Tennessee, and who moved to Chicago in 1862 and built a successful wholesale grocery business. In 1870, Cossitt purchased several hundred acres of farmland in Lyons Township, along the Chicago-Dixon Road, known today as Ogden Avenue ( U.S. Highway 34 ). Ogden Avenue, on the site of a defunct Native American trail, was also referred to as the &quot; Old Plank Road &quot;. Planks were often stolen by settlers to be used as building material, which made traveling very bumpy. When the Chicago, Burlington &amp; Quincy Railroad came to town, La Grange was a milk stop called Hazel Glen. A few miles to the south, through present day Willow Springs, the Illinois and Michigan Canal had emerged as a major shipping corridor, connecting Chicago and the Great Lakes with the Illinois and Mississippi River s. Cossitt set out to build the ideal suburban village - laying out street s, planting tree s, donating property for church es and school s, and building quality homes for sale. He also placed liquor restrictions in the land deeds he sold to prevent the village from becoming a saloon town. When Cossitt began his development, the area was served by a post office known as Kensington. But upon learning of another community already with that name in Illinois, Cossitt decided to name his town in honor of La Grange, Tennessee, where he had been raised as a youth on an uncle&apos;s cotton farm. However, today Kensington remains the name of one of the village&apos;s major streets. After the Great Chicago Fire of 1871 destroyed much of that city, thousands of its citizens sought new homes and opportunities far from the city&apos;s ills but within a convenient commute. La Grange was ideally situated to accommodate them. [ Geography ] La Grange is located at [ 41 48 29 N 87 52 24 W type:city ] (41.807938, -87.873455) [ 1 ], about [ 13 mi km ] west of Chicago. According to the United States Census Bureau, the village has a total area of [ 2.5 sqmi km2 ], all of it land. Two major railroad tracks run through the village, including the Burlington Northern Santa Fe, and the CSX/Indiana Harbor Belt lines.Some 14,000 years ago, the land under La Grange sat on the western shore of Lake Chicago, predecessor to Lake Michigan. The prehistoric shoreline today is delineated by Bluff Avenue, a north-south street on the village&apos;s east side. [ Demographics ] As of the census [ 2 ] of 2000, there were 15,608 people, 5,624 households, and 4,049 families residing in the village. The population density was 6,220.7 people per square mile (2,400.9/km²). There were 5,781 housing units at an average density of 2,304.1 per square mile (889.3/km²). The racial makeup of the village was 91.02% White, 6.02% African American, 0.09% Native American, 1.00% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 0.99% from other races, and 0.86% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 3.66% of the population. The top five ancestries reported in La Grange as of the 2000 census were Irish (25.2%), German (24.8%), Polish (10.5%), Italian (10.2%) and English (9.7%). [ Profile of General Demographic Characteristics, La Grange, Illinois 39.1   KiB ] {. } { U.S. Census Bureau. Accessed 2007-04-03. } There were 5,624 households out of which 37.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 60.3% were married couples living together, 9.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 28.0% were non-families. 24.5% of all households were made up of individuals and 9.7% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.67 and the average family size was 3.23. In the village the population was spread out with 28.5% under the age of 18, 4.8% from 18 to 24, 29.4% from 25 to 44, 23.8% from 45 to 64, and 13.5% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 38 years. For every 100 females there were 94.2 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 87.4 males. The median income for a household in the village was $80,342, and the median income for a family was $95,554. Males had a median income of $62,030 versus $41,260 for females. The per capita income for the village was $34,887. About 3.2% of families and 4.0% of the population were below the poverty line, including 4.3% of those under age 18 and 4.4% of those age 65 or over. [ Government ] [ April 2012 ] The Village of La Grange is a non- home rule municipal corporation and operates under a board-manager form of government. A seven-member board of trustees, elected as provided by state law, serves four-year overlapping terms. A village manager is appointed by the board. The village has six operating departments: administration, finance, police, fire, community development and public works. The village is in Illinois&apos; 3rd congressional district, and is represented by Dan Lipinski. The village is served by the Park District of La Grange with a five-member board of commissioners, elected as provided by state law, which serves four-year overlapping terms. An executive director is appointed by the board. [ Endorsing organizations ] The longest-lived continuing endorsing organization in La Grange is the Citizens’ Council { http://www.lgcitizenscouncil.org }. As all such organizations under the village manager form of government, it is non-partisan. The council in particular seeks, evaluates, and recommends candidates for the village, library and park district Boards. Other non-partisan slating organizations form periodically to seek and support candidates for the various elected boards. [ Business and commerce ] [ April 2012 ] La Grange is the mailing address for the headquarters of Electro-Motive Diesel, formerly General Motors &apos; Electro-Motive Division, a major manufacturer of railroad locomotive s and diesel engine s. The headquarters, engineering facilities and parts-manufacturing operations actually are located in the adjacent village of McCook; originally, the locomotives were also built there, but in more recent years final assembly has moved to EMD&apos;s other facility in London, Ontario. The downtown area, centered along and around La Grange Road ( US 45 ) and the BNSF Railway line, grew somewhat run-down during the 1980s; however, the mid-to-late 1990s saw a revival, with many new businesses opening, including a Borders Books. Many of these new businesses are restaurant s; LaGrange draws much of this business from the neighboring town of Western Springs, since Western Springs did not allow the sale of alcoholic beverage s in restaurants until recently. In June 2006, animal statues were placed around the downtown area, mimicking the famous Chicago Cows. This expansion of the downtown led to increased congestion; often, parking became difficult to find, especially on weekends. One proposal to remedy this was the building of a parking garage in a current parking-lot area; some very vocal residents, however, opposed this as a waste of tax dollars. Eventually, a referendum on the parking garage was passed; ground was broken on March 3, 2005. The parking structure is now complete and operational. The parking structure was paid for by a grant from the state for the advancement of public transportation (increasing parking for train commuters would increase the number of people willing to use the train). The upkeep is paid for by an increase in the sales tax at restaurants and other entertainment establishments. There was no increase in the local property taxes. La Grange holds numerous public activities and festivals. The annual Pet Parade celebrated its 60th anniversary June 3, 2006. Art fairs, historic housewalks, carnivals, and farmer&apos;s markets are also common, mostly taking place in the downtown area. [ Transportation ] { BNSF Railway Line } Two major highway s traverse La Grange: The village&apos;s main street, La Grange Road (U.S. Routes 12 / 20 / 45 ) runs north-south; Ogden Avenue ( U.S. Route 34 ) runs east-west. U.S. 34 intersects with the Tri-State Tollway (I-294), west of the village, while U.S. 12/20/45 intersects Interstate 55 south of the village. The BNSF Railway also runs through La Grange. Daily commuter service on that line, connecting Aurora and Chicago, is provided by Metra, and stops at two stations within the village: La Grange Road and Stone Avenue. Amtrak also serves the station nearest La Grange Road. Freight rail traffic on the line is extremely heavy, with BNSF operating freight trains on all three mainline routes through the village. During non-rush hours, a freight train may run along the line as frequently as once every ten minutes on average. Passenger airline service is available at O&apos;Hare and Midway airports, both located in Chicago. A proposed passenger rail line connecting the two airports would have a station in La Grange. Commuter bus service is provided by Pace, the suburban bus division of the Regional Transportation Authority. LaGrange was once home to a municipal air field called Stinson Airport. The airport was closed in the late 1950s and is now a large quarry. [ Architecture ] A few homes in town were designed by Frank Lloyd Wright. There is even a &quot; boot-leg &quot; house, one he designed on the side when he was supposed to be working for architect Louis Sullivan. [ Public schools ] La Grange has public elementary school s, including two of the four schools in LaGrange Elementary School District 102 : Cossitt School (named after Franklin Cossitt) and Ogden Avenue School (named after the local name for U.S. Route 34, which in turn is named after William Butler Ogden, first mayor of Chicago ). Park Junior High is also part of District 102, but is located in La Grange Park, Illinois. Two other elementary schools in La Grange are part of La Grange Elementary School District 105: Seventh Avenue School and Spring Avenue School, both located on the streets that share their names. Gurrie Middle School also serves District 105. More elementary schools in La Grange include Forest Road Elementary, and Congress Park. St. Cletus and St. Francis Xavier serve as the two Roman Catholic schools in La Grange. St. John&apos;s Lutheran is the one Lutheran elementary school in the village limits. Lyons Township High School in La Grange, originally founded in 1888, now has 2 campuses. North Campus, located in La Grange, is used by Juniors and Seniors and was the original high school. Freshmen and Sophomores go to South Campus, founded in 1956, located in neighboring Western Springs. The Campus was split due to lack of available land for expansion around the original building. Previously there also was a junior college associated with the high school but due to increasing enrollment, lack of space, and new rules that separated junior colleges from high schools, it was merged with College of DuPage in 1967. When it was open, Lyons Township Junior College was nicknamed Tick-Tock Tech, due to its location near the clock tower. [ Health ] La Grange Memorial Hospital, operated by Adventist Health System, is a level-two trauma center. The hospital has 270 inpatient beds. A $79 million renovation and expansion of the facility was completed in early 2007. [ Notable people ] John Briscoe, pitcher for the Oakland Athletics Sarah Wayne Callies, actor ( Prison Break and The Walking Dead ) Patrick Chovanec, business professor at Tsinghua University, economics and political commentator Luis Armand Garcia, actor ( The George Lopez Show ) David Hasselhoff, actor (Baywatch), and German pop superstar Fred Herbert, pitcher for the New York Giants Jeff Hornacek, basketball player and All-Star for the National Basketball Association Otto F. Hunziker, educator and technical innovator in the dairy industry Jason Karnuth, pitcher for the St. Louis Cardinals and Detroit Tigers George Paskvan, fullback and defensive back for the Green Bay Packers Tim Stapleton, centre for the Atlanta Thrashers [ References ] [ External links ] Village of La Grange Website La Grange Public Library La Grange Area Historical Society Category:Villages in Illinois Category:Populated places established in 1830 Category:Populated places in Cook County, Illinois Category:Chicago metropolitan area bg:Ла Гранж (Илинойс) ca:La Grange (Illinois) de:La Grange (Illinois) es:La Grange (Illinois) fr:La Grange (Illinois) ht:La Grange, Ilinwa nl:La Grange (Illinois) pt:La Grange (Illinois) simple:La Grange, Illinois vo:La Grange (Illinois) zh:拉格兰奇 (伊利诺伊州)