[ List of Free Corps ] Freikorps ( [ Free Corps ] ) are German volunteer military or paramilitary units. The term was originally applied to voluntary armies formed in German lands from the middle of the 18th century onwards. Between World War I and World War II the term was also used for the paramilitary organizations that arose during the Weimar period. Freikorps units fought both for and against the German state. They formed the vanguard of the Nazi movement. [ First Freikorps ] [ January 2011 ] { Heinrich Hartmann, } { Theodor Körner and } { Friedrich Friesen } The first Freikorps were recruited by Frederick II of Prussia in the 18th century during the Seven Years&apos; War. The Freikorps were regarded as unreliable by regular armies, so they were mainly used as sentries and for minor duties. During the Napoleonic Wars, Freikorps were formed for the purpose of shaking off French rule in Germany. Those led by Ferdinand von Schill were decimated in the Battle of Stralsund (1809); many were killed in battle or executed at Napoleon&apos;s command in the aftermath. Later, Ludwig Adolf Wilhelm von Lützow, a survivor of Schill&apos;s Freikorps, formed the Lützow Free Corps, which took part in the German War of Liberation. The anti-Napoleonic Freikorps often operated behind French lines as a kind of commando or guerrilla force. Throughout the 19th century, these anti-Napoleonic Freikorps were greatly praised and glorified by German nationalists, and a heroic myth built up around their exploits. This myth was invoked, in considerably different circumstances, in the aftermath of Germany&apos;s defeat in World War I. [ Post-World War I ] Recruitment poster for Freikorps Hülsen The meaning of the word Freikorps changed over time. After 1918, the term was used for the paramilitary organizations that sprang up around Germany as soldiers returned in defeat from World War I. They were the key Weimar paramilitary groups active during that time. Many German veterans felt disconnected from civilian life, and joined a Freikorps in search of stability within a military structure. Others, angry at their sudden, apparently inexplicable defeat, joined up in an effort to put down Communist uprisings or exact some form of revenge (see stab-in-the-back legend ). They received considerable support from Minister of Defense Gustav Noske, a member of the Social Democratic Party of Germany, who used them to crush the German Revolution of 1918–1919 and the Marxist Spartacist League and arrest Karl Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg, who were killed on 15 January 1919. They were also used to defeat the Bavarian Soviet Republic in May 1919. [ The German Freikorps 1918-23: 1918-23 Carlos Caballero Jurado, Ramiro Bujeiro 2001 Osprey Publishing 1-84176-184-2 ] On 5 May 1919, 12 workers (most of them members of the Social Democratic Party) were arrested and killed by members of Freikorps Lützow in Perlach near Munich based on a tip from a local cleric saying they were communists. A memorial on Pfanzeltplatz in Munich today commemorates the incident. [ Jude und Demokrat: Erinnerungen eines Münchener Rechtsanwalts 1883 bis 1939 Max Hirschberg &amp; Reinhard Weber ] { Morris, Justice Imperiled: The Anti-Nazi Lawyer } { Max Hirschberg in Weimar Germany } { Freikorps Lützow in the Axis History Factbook } Freikorps also fought in the Baltic, Silesia, and Prussia after the end of World War I, sometimes with significant success. They raped and murdered with abandon, and Anti-slavic racism was present, although the ethnic cleansing ideology and anti-Semitism that would be expressed in later years was not developed yet. { Michael Mann, Fascists, Cambridge/New York: Cambridge University, 2004, ISBN 9780521831314, p. 153. } Though officially disbanded in 1920, many Freikorps attempted, unsuccessfully, to overthrow the government in the Kapp Putsch in March 1920. Their attack was halted when German citizens who were loyal to the state went on strike, cutting off many services and making daily life so problematic that the coup was called off. In 1920, Adolf Hitler had just begun his political career as the leader of the tiny and as-yet-unknown German Workers Party (soon renamed the National Socialist German Workers Party, NSDAP) in Munich. Numerous future members and leaders of the Nazi Party had served in the Freikorps, including Ernst Röhm, future head of the Sturmabteilung, or SA, Heinrich Himmler, future head of the Schutzstaffel, or SS, and Rudolf Höß, the future Kommandant of the Auschwitz concentration camp. Hermann Ehrhardt, founder and leader of Marinebrigade Ehrhardt, and his deputy Commander Eberhard Kautter, leaders of the Viking League, refused to help Hitler and Erich Ludendorff in their Beer Hall Putsch and conspired against them. [ Relations with Hitler ] Freikorps leaders symbolically gave their old battle flags to Hitler&apos;s SA and SS on November 9, 1933 in a huge ceremony. { Waite, p. 197. } Historian Robert Waite claims that Hitler had many problems with certain aspects of the Freikorps. Many of the Freikorps had joined the SA, so when the Night of the Long Knives came, they were among those targeted for killing or arrest, including Ehrhardt and Röhm. He claims that in Hitler&apos;s &quot; Röhm Purge &quot; speech to the Reichstag on July 13, 1934, the third group of &quot; pathological enemies of the state &quot; that Hitler lists are, in fact, the Freikorps fighters. { Waite, pg 280-281. See also the full text of the speech at http://members.tripod.com/~Comicism/340713.html } As the following list shows, the Freikorps were largely fanatically right-wing fighters, part of Europe-wide conflict like the White Guard in Finland, and subsequently formed the core of the Nazi establishment. [ November 2011 ] [ Notable Freikorps members ] Josef Adams, SS Officer Friedrich Alpers SS General Ludolf von Alvensleben SS General Rudolf Bamler General Kurt Benson, SS &apos;&apos;Oberführer&apos; Rudolph Berthold, World War I ace Gottlob Berger,SS General Karl-Heinz Bertling, SS Oberführer Wilhelm Bittrich SS General Martin Bormann, NSDAP Politician/SS General Wilhelm Canaris, Admiral Friedrich Christiansen Luftwaffe General Oluf Christensen, SA Brigadefuhrer Franz Classen, SS General Kurt Daluege, SS General Karl Diebitsch SS Oberführer Josef Dietrich SS General Oskar Dirlewanger, SS Colonel Anton Dunckern, SS General Freiherr Karl von Eberstein SS General Johannes Engel, SS General Hermann Ehrhardt Hans Frank SA General/Governor-General of Poland Fritz Freitag, SS General Karl Gebhardt, SS General Richard Glücks, SS General Arthur Greiser, SS General Adam Grünewald, SS Major Wilhelm Harster SS General Franz Hayler SS General ||Hans Hans Hayn SA Leader Reinhard Heydrich, SS General Richard Hildebrandt SS General Heinrich Himmler, Reichsführer-SS Hans Hinkel, SS Officer Rudolf Hoess, Kommandant of Auschwitz Hoess et al., pg 201 Karl Höfer, SS General Bernhard von Hülsen, German General Friedrich Gustav Jaeger Dietrich von Jagow, SA General, German Diplomat Friedrich Jeckeln SS General Ferdinand Jodl, German General Ernst Kantorowicz Medieval Historian Hans Kammler, SS General Wilhelm Keitel, Field Marshal Matthias Kleinheisterkamp SS General Waldemar Klingelhöfer SS officer Erich Koch, NSDAP leader for East Prussia Eberhard Kautter Heinrich Kreipe, German General Arthur Liebehenschel SS Officer Georg Lindemann, German General Wilhelm List, German General Wilhelm Friedrich Loeper, SS General Bruno Loerzer, Luftwaffe General Heinz Greiner, German General Viktor Lutze, SA Leader Benno Martin, SS General Josef Albert Meisinger SS Colonel Paul Moder, SS General Thomas Müller (SS officer) SS Officer Friedrich T. Noltenius World War I ace Karl von Oberkamp, SS General Axis History Forum Günther Pancke SS General Heinz Pernet SA Brigadeführer Hartmut Plaas Oswald Pohl SS General Hans-Adolf Prützmann, SS General Hermann-Bernhard Ramcke Luftwaffe General Johann Rattenhuber SS General Hanns Albin Rauter SS Officer Ernst Röhm, SA Leader Beppo Römer, KPD Member Emanuel Schäfer SS Colonel Julian Scherner SS Officer Albert Leo Schlageter, anti-French Saboteur Walter Schimana SS General Wilhelm Wilhelm Schmid, SA Leader Karl Eberhard Schöngarth, SS General Werner Schrader,German Army Officer Julius Schreck, SS Leader Franz Seldte SA Leader Max Simon, SS General Hugo Sperrle, Luftwaffe General Felix Steiner, SS General Walter Stennes, SA Leader Franz Walter Stahlecker SS General Walter Staudinger, SS General Gregor Strasser, NSDAP Member Otto Strasser, NSDAP Member Wilhelm Stuckart, SS General Friedrich Uebelhoer, SS General Hans-Jürgen von Blumenthal German Army Officer Franz Ritter von Epp, NSDAP Reichsstatthalter for Bavaria Curt von Gottberg, SS general Wolf-Heinrich Graf von Helldorf, SA member Maximilian von Herff, SS General Peter von Heydebreck, SA leader Manfred Freiherr von Killinger Bolko von Richthofen relative of the Red Baron Ernst von Salomon, Organisation Consul member Franz Pfeffer von Salomon, SA leader Fritz von Scholz SS General Otto Teetzmann SS Oberführer Edmund Trinkl, SS Officer Otmar Freiherr von Verschuer SS Doctor Hilmar Wäckerle SS officer Walther Wenck, German Army General Karl Wolff, SS General [ Notable Freikorps units ] Kurt Benson { Volunteer Division of Horse Guards (Garde-Kavallerie-Schützendivision) } murdered Rosa Luxemburg and Karl Liebknecht, Jan 15, 1919 Waite, p. 62. led by Captain Pabst disbanded on order of Defense Minister Gustav Noske, Jul 7, 1919, after Pabst threatened to kill him Waite, p. 145 [ http://www.axishistory.com/index.php?id%3D5788 Axis History Factbook 2009 1 3 ] had Reinhard Heydrich as a member Mueller, p 61 founded by Ludwig Maercker founded by Gerhard Roßbach rescued the Iron Division after an extremely long march across Eastern Europe. Waite, pg 131, 132 had Rudolph Hoess as a member. participated in the Kapp Putsch of 1920 Waite, pp. 140-142 disbanded members eventually formed the Organisation Consul, which performed hundreds of political assassinations Waite, pp. 203, 216 Fought in the Baltic. Got trapped in Thorensberg by the Latvian Army. Was rescued by the Rossbach Freikorps. Occupied Munich following the revolution of April, 1919. Commanded by Major Schulz Waite, p. 89 Formed by Czech German nationalists with Nazi sympathies which operated from 1938 to 1939 Part of Hitler&apos;s successful effort to absorb Czechoslovakia into the Third Reich [ See also ] Freikorps in the Baltic Battle of Annaberg May 1921 Free Corps Denmark [ References ] [ Bibliography ] [ 3633548 ] Blanke, Richard. &apos;&apos;Orphans of Versailles: The Germans in Western Poland, 1918-1939&apos;&apos;, University Press of Kentucky, 1993, ISBN 081311803 Hoess, Rudolf. Constantine Fitzgibbon, and Primo Levi. &apos;&apos;Commandant of Auschwitz: The Autobiography of Rudolf Hoess&apos;&apos;, Sterling Publishing Co., 2000. Translated by Constantine Fitzgibbon, Joachim Neugroschel. ISBN 1-84212-024-7, ISBN 978-1-84212-024-8 Morris, Douglas G. &apos;&apos;Justice Imperiled: The Anti-Nazi Lawyer Max Hirschberg in Weimar Germany&apos;&apos;, 2005, University of Michigan Press, ISBN 0-472-11476-X Mueller, Michael. &apos;&apos;Canaris&apos;&apos;, Naval Institute Press, 2007 Read, Anthony. &apos;&apos;The Devil&apos;s Disciples: Hitler&apos;s Inner Circle&apos;&apos;, W. W. Norton &amp; Company, 2004. ISBN 0-393-04800-4, ISBN 978-0-393-04800-1 Waite, Robert G. L. Vanguard of Nazism: The Free Corps Movement in Post-War Germany, 1918 –1923., W W Norton &amp; Co. 1952, repr. 1969 [ Notes ] [ 2 ] [ External links ] Axis History Factbook; Freikorps section – By Marcus Wendel and contributors;    site also contains an apolitical forum Freikorps Master list on Axis History Forum {reference only} Category:Anti-communism Category:Military history of Germany Category:Political repression in Germany Category:Terrorism in Germany Category:Weimar Republic Category:Counter-revolutionaries Category:German Revolution of 1918–19 af:Freikorps ast:Freikorps ca:Cos franc cs:Freikorps da:Frikorps de:Freikorps el:Φράικορπς et:Vabakorpused es:Freikorps eu:Freikorps fr:Corps franc ko:자유군단 id:Freikorps it:Corpi Franchi he:פרייקור lv:Brīvkorpuss hu:Freikorps nl:Vrijkorps ja:ドイツ義勇軍 no:Frikorps nn:Frikorps pl:Freikorps pt:Freikorps ru:Фрайкор simple:Freikorps sr:Фрајкори fi:Freikorps sv:Frikår tr:Freikorps zh:自由軍團