[ monarch Odo King of Western Francia Odo of France.PNG 888–898 February 888, Compiègne france Count of Paris Charles the Fat Charles III Théodrate of Troyes Robertian Robert the Strong Adelaide of Tours c.860 1 January 898 La Fère, France ] Odo (or Eudes) (c. 860 –1 January 898) was a King of Western Francia, reigning from 888 to 898. He was a son of Robert the Strong, count of Anjou, whose branch of the family is known as the Robertians. Odo is also known as the Duke of France and Count of Paris. [ Origin ] Odo was the eldest son of Robert the Great, Duke of the Franks and Marquis of Neustria, belonging to the branch known as the Robertians. After his father&apos;s death in 866, Odo inherited his father&apos;s title of Marquis of Neustria. Odo lost this title in 895 when King Charles the Bald appointed Hugh the Abbot to the title, but regained it following the death of Hugh. In the interim, between 890 and 894, he held the post of Count of Paris. Odo was also the lay abbot of St. Martin of Tours. { Ernest Lavisse, Histoire de France, tome ii. (Paris, 1903) } { E. Favre, Eudes, comte de Paris et roi de France (Paris, 1893) } Odo married Théodrate of Troyes and had two known sons, Arnulf (born probably about 885) and Guy (born probably about 888), neither of whom lived past the age of fifteen. [ King ] The Coronation of Odo, from the &apos;&apos;Grandes Chroniques de France&apos;&apos; A Romantic image (1883) of Eudes regaining Paris by riding through the besiegers For his skill and bravery in resisting the attacks of the Vikings at the Siege of Paris, Odo was chosen by the western Franks to be their king following the removal of emperor Charles the Fat. He was crowned at Compiègne in February 888 by Walter, Archbishop of Sens. { Gwatking, H. M., Whitney, J. P., et al. Cambridge Medieval History: Volume III—Germany and the Western Empire. Cambridge University Press:London(1930) } Odo continued to battle against the Vikings and defeated them at Montfaucon, but he was soon involved in a struggle with powerful nobles who supported the claim of Charles the Simple to the Frankish throne. In 889 and 890 Odo granted special privileges to the County of Manresa in Osona. Because of its position on the front line against Moorish aggression, Manresa was given the right to build towers of defence known as manresanas or manresanes. This privilege was responsible for giving Manresa its unique character, distinct from the rest of Osona, for the next two centuries. To gain prestige and support, Odo paid homage to the Eastern Frankish King Arnulf of Carinthia. But in 894 Arnulf declared his support for Charles, and after a conflict which lasted three years, Odo was compelled to come to terms with his rival and surrender a district north of the Seine to him. Odo died in La Fère on 1 January 898. [ References ] [ King of Western Francia Charles the Fat Charles III 887 –898 ] [ France, Odo Of 860 898 La Fère, France ] Category:Robertian dynasty Category:Roman Catholic monarchs Category:Frankish kings Category:860 births Category:898 deaths Category:Counts of Orléans Category:Counts of Paris Category:9th-century rulers in Europe bs:Odo, kralj Zapadne Franačke br:Odo Iañ, roue ar Franked bg:Одо ca:Odó I de França cs:Odo Pařížský de:Odo von Paris el:Εύδης Α&apos; της Γαλλίας es:Eudes de Francia eo:Eŭdo la 1-a fr:Eudes de France ko:외드 hr:Odo, kralj Francuske id:Eudes dari Perancis it:Oddone, conte di Parigi he:אודו, מלך צרפת la:Odo I (rex Franciae) hu:Odó nyugati frank király mk:Одо (Франција) nl:Odo I van Frankrijk ja:ウード (西フランク王) pl:Odon (władca Franków) pt:Odo, Conde de Paris ru:Эд (король Франции) simple:Odo of France sk:Odo I. sr:Одо Париски sh:Odo, kralj Francuske fi:Eudes (Ranska) sv:Odo, hertig av Paris vi:Eudes I của Pháp vls:Odo I van West-Francië yo:Odo, Count of Paris zh:厄德一世 (西法兰克)