[ English country house April 2011 ] [ November 2007 ] { Wentworth Woodhouse, Yorkshire. The largest private house in the United Kingdom. Guinness Book of Records, 1966, p.175 } { An example of the true } { stately home. From &apos;&apos;A Complete History of the County of York&apos;&apos; by Thomas Allen (1828 –30) } { English stately home } A stately home is a &quot; great country house &quot;. { Oxford English Dictionary, vol.XVI, Oxford, 1989, p.559: &quot; stately home: originally in allusion to quotation of 1827 (i.e. Blackwood&apos;s Magazine, as mentioned in WP article); now a fixed phrase designating a great country house &quot;. } It is thus a palatial great house or in some cases an updated castle, located in the British Isles, { The term is not used for large houses located elsewhere in the English-speaking world, i.e. USA, Australia etc. The corresponding French term might be &quot; grand chateau &quot; } mostly built between the mid-16th century and the early part of the 20th century, as well as converted abbeys and other church property (after the Dissolution of the Monasteries ). They are in form and substance palace s by another name, yet that term in England is generally reserved for royal or episcopal residences, however modest in comparison to the stately home. [ Location ] Stately homes are always located in the countryside, and their owners generally owned palatial homes in London also, in proximity to the royal court and parliament. These London residences, known as townhouse s, corresponding to the hôtel particulier of Paris, { Larousse Dictionnaire de la Langue Francaise, Lexis, 1993; immeuble entierement occupe par un riche particulier et sa famille (building entirely occupied by a rich private individual and his family) } generally took for their name the title or family name of their owner, such as Devonshire House, Grosvenor House, Spencer House, Northumberland House etc. Stately homes may include parts of true fortified &quot; castles &quot;, if the buildings have been extensively extended, as at Belvoir Castle and Warwick Castle. Castle Howard is a misnomer, not being a castle, but a palatial residence. [ Purpose ] These houses were status symbol s for the great families of England, generally headed by great statesmen, who competed with each other to provide suitably grand settings in which to entertain members of the royal family. They were also the settings where affairs of state and party political matters were discussed informally among the ruling elite. They are termed the &quot; seat &quot; of their owner if he bears a title of nobility, the implication being the seat of a political powerbase, as was the true seat on the benches in the House of Lords where he had a right to sit and help determine the political destiny of the nation. [ Architecture ] Famous architect s and landscape architect s such as Robert Adam, Sir Charles Barry, Sir Edwin Lutyens, Sir John Vanbrugh, Capability Brown and Humphry Repton were employed to incorporate new styles into the buildings. Great art and furniture collections were built up and displayed in the houses. [ Decline ] The agricultural collapse towards the end of the 19th century, the First World War and then World War II changed the fortunes of many houses and their owners, and now they remain as a curious mix of living museums, part-ruined houses and castles and grand family estates.The introduction of inheritance tax caused many owners to relinquish ownership to the National Trust, being no longer able to afford their upkeep. [ Current ownership ] [ Private ] Many stately homes are still owned and managed by private individuals who are descendants of their original builders, or by family trusts. The costs of running a stately home are naturally extremely high. Many owners let their properties for use as film and television sets as a means of gaining extra income, thus many of them are familiar sights to people who have never visited them in person. The grounds often contain other tourist attractions, such as safari parks, funfairs or museums. The Marquess of Bath at Longleat House in Wiltshire was the first to establish the commercial venture of a safari park in its grounds, followed by Woburn Abbey, seat of the Dukes of Bedford. [ Institutional ] The following organisations own and are responsible for the upkeep of some stately homes: English Heritage National Trust Treasure Houses of England The Landmark Trust Historic Scotland National Trust for Scotland [ Origin of the term ] The phrase stately home is a quotation from the poem The Homes of England, which was originally published in Blackwood&apos;s Magazine in 1827. The poem is by Felicia Hemans, and it begins as follows: The stately Homes of England, How beautiful they stand, Amidst their tall ancestral trees, O’er all the pleasant land! Noël Coward, English playwright, composer, director, actor and singer, wrote and performed a parody of the above: The stately homes of England, How beautiful they stand, To prove the upper classes Have still the upper hand. In the later, Las Vegas phase of his career, Coward revised his lyrics: The stately homes of England, We proudly represent; We only keep them up For Americans to rent.... [ Usage of term ] Modest owners do not usually use the phrase &quot; stately home &quot; but are more likely to call their property a &quot; country house &quot;, which might seem an understatement to the objective observer. &quot; Stately home &quot; should be a term reserved for the truly palatial residence alone, but is nowadays often misused by estate agent s wishing to aggrandise houses which are grand but not palatial. The term is also used imprecisely by commentators on modern society such as Robin Leach in Lifestyles of the Rich and Famous and parodists such as Dame Edna Everage. [ List of English Stately Homes ] The following is a list of some of the largest English country houses, termed stately homes. [ 4 ] Audley End House Badminton House Blenheim Palace Blickling Hall Bowood House Burghley House Carlton Towers Castle Howard Chatsworth House Chevening Easton Neston Harewood House Hatfield House Highclere Castle Holkham Hall Houghton Hall Kedleston Hall Knebworth House Knowsley Hall Knole House Longleat House Mentmore Towers Montacute House Petworth House Stowe House Welbeck Abbey Wentworth Woodhouse Wilton House Woburn Abbey [ Illustrations ] [ April 2011 ] The following illustrations seek to show stately homes at their maximum expanses, in approximate descending order of size: Portrait Name County; Date of design; Patron 200px Chatsworth House Devonshire; 1687; William Cavendish, 1st Duke of Devonshire 200px Blenheim Palace Oxfordshire; 1705; Queen Anne for John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough 200px Longleat House Wiltshire; c.1570; Sir John Thynne (d.1580) 200px Castle Howard N. Yorkshire; 1699; Charles Howard, 3rd Earl of Carlisle 200px Wentworth Woodhouse S. Yorkshire; 1723; Thomas Watson-Wentworth, 1st Marquess of Rockingham 200px Kedleston Hall Derbyshire; 1759; Sir Nathaniel Curzon (later 1st Baron Scarsdale) 200px Wilton House Wiltshire; 1630; Philip Herbert, 4th Earl of Pembroke 200px Petworth House West Sussex; 1688; Charles Seymour, 6th Duke of Somerset. (Altered in 1870&apos;s) 200px Holkham Hall Norfolk; 1732; Thomas Coke, later 1st Earl of Leicester (d.1759) 200px Woburn Abbey Bedfordshire; 1744; John Russell, 4th Duke of Bedford [ See also ] [ 2 ] English country house contents auctions English country house Great house Manor house Townhouse Historic house List of historic houses in England List of historic houses Manor House Treasure Houses of England [ References ] [ Sources ] Nicholson, Nigel. Great Houses of Britain, Book Club Associates, London, 1978. [ Further reading ] Peter Mandler, The Fall and Rise of the Stately Home, Yale University Press, 1997. ISBN 0-300-07869-2. Category:Country houses Category:House types in the United Kingdom Category:House styles Category:House types Category:Grade I listed houses Category:English architecture Category:British architecture Category:Architecture of the United Kingdom th:คฤหาสน์ภูมิฐาน