[ January 2012 ] [ Ghana Armed Forces 250px Military parade during 50th anniversary celebrations Accra, Ghana Minister of Defence Chief of the Defence Staff 2.0 (FY 10) 1957 Army Navy Air Force 18 years of age (2002) ] The Ghana Armed Forces are the Army, Navy, and Air Force. { Central Intelligence Agency, } { The World Factbook : Ghana, accessed 15 November 2011 } It is supervised by the Ministry of Defence (Ghana). With around 7,000 personnel serving in the Ghanian military, Ghana has the lowest ratio of active troops per thousand citizens in the world, standing at 0.33. [ October 2011 ] The Army is larger than the Air Force and the Navy. Ghana&apos;s supreme military commander is the President of The Republic. The day-to-day running of the armed forces is managed by the Ministry of Defence and the Chief of Defence Staff. The Ministry of Defence and Central Defence Headquarters are both located in Accra. Accra, in the British colony of the Gold Coast, was also the location of the British Army’s Headquarters West Africa Command which remained there until its disbandment in 1956. The Ghanaian military often has to make do with poorly-serviced weaponry and equipment due to lack of maintenance training and capability. [ January 2012 ] As a result, maintenance tasks are often contracted to U.N. and other foreign military advisors and technicians. [ January 2012 ] [ The military in politics ] [ History of Ghana (1966-1979) ] Ghana &apos;s modern military was formed after independence in 1957. Major General Stephen Otu was the first native Ghanaian Chief of Defence Staff, being appointed in September 1961. From 1966 the military was extensively involved in politics, mounting several coups. Kwame Nkrumah had become Ghana&apos;s first Prime Minister when the country became independent in 1960. Nkrumah&apos;s rule wore on, he began to take actions which disquieted the leadership of the armed forces, including the creation and expansion of the President&apos;s Own Guard Regiment. As a result, on February 24, 1966, a small number of army officers and senior police officials, led by Colonel Emmanuel Kotoka, commander of the Second Army Brigade at Kumasi, Major Akwasi Afrifa, staff officer in charge of army training and operations, Lieutenant General (retired) Joseph Ankrah, and J.W.K. Harlley, the police inspector general, successfully launched a coup d&apos;état against the Nkrumah regime. { La Verle Berry (ed.), &apos;The National Liberation Council,&apos; in Ghana Country Study, Library of Congress, research complete November 1994 } The group formed the National Liberation Council, which was to rule Ghana from 1966 to 1969. The second coup took place in 1972, after the reinstated civilian government had cut military privileges and began to start changing the leadership of the army&apos;s combat units. Lieutenant Colonel Ignatius Kutu Acheampong, temporarily commanding the First Brigade around Accra, led a bloodless coup that ended the Second Republic in January 1972. { Berry (ed.), 1994 } Thus the National Redemption Council was formed. Acheampong became head of state, and the NRC ruled from 1972 to 1975. On October 9, 1975, the NRC was replaced by the Supreme Military Council. [ http://www.britannica.com/eb/article-76830 Ghana 2007-03-20 2007 Encyclopædia Britannica Online Encyclopædia Britannica ] Its composition consisted of Colonel Acheampong, the chairman, who was also promoted straight from Colonel to General. The others included the military hierarchy consisting of Lt. Gen. Fred Akuffo, the Chief of Defence Staff, and the army, navy, air force and Border Guards commanders respectively. In July 1978, in a sudden move, the other SMC officers forced Acheampong to resign, replacing him with Lieutenant General Akuffo. The SMC apparently acted in response to continuing pressure to find a solution to the country&apos;s economic dilemma. Inflation was estimated to be as high as 300 percent that year. The council was also motivated by Acheampong&apos;s failure to dampen rising political pressure for changes. Akuffo, the new SMC chairman, promised publicly to hand over political power to a new government to be elected by 1 July 1979. { McLaughlin &amp; Owusu-Ansah (1994), &quot; The National Redemption Council Years, 1972-79 &quot;. } The decree lifting the ban on party politics went into effect on 1 January 1979, as planned. However in June, just before the scheduled resumption of civilian rule, a group of young armed forces officers, led by Flight Lieutenant Jerry Rawlings, mounted yet another coup. They put in place the Armed Forces Revolutionary Council, which ruled until September 1979. However, in 1981, Rawlings deposed the new civilian government again, this time establishing the Provisional National Defence Council. The PNDC remained in power until January 7, 1993. In the last years of the PNDC, Jerry Rawlings assumed civilian status; he was elected as a civilian President in 1993 and continued in power until 2001. [ Army ] [ Ghana Army ] Ghanaian soldiers during a simulated amphibious landing in Southwest Ghana The Ghana Army is structured as follows: The Northern Command with headquarters in Kumasi and the Southern Command with headquarters in Accra. In March 2000 these two commands were formed after a restructuring. Africa South of the Sahara 2003, 32nd Edition Previously there were three brigades: 1st Infantry Brigade (HQ in Teshie), 2nd Infantry Brigade (HQ in Kumasi) and Support Services Brigade (HQ in Burma Camp). 6 Infantry Battalions of the Ghana Regiment. 3rd Battalion of Infantry, 4th Battalion of Infantry and 5th Battalion of Infantry in the Northern Command, 1st Battalion of Infantry, 2nd Battalion of Infantry and 5th Battalion of Infantry in the Southern Command. 2 Airborne companies attached to Northern Command; Airborne Force 1 Battalion in charge of state security; 64 Infantry Regiment (formerly known as President&apos;s Own Guard Regiment ) 1 Training Battalion 1 Staff College 2 Armoured reconnaissance squadrons of the Reconnaissance Armoured Regiment 1 Signals Regiment 2 Engineer Regiments (48 Engineer Regiment and 49 Engineer Regiment) 1 artillery regiment (66 Artillery Regiment) 1 Logistics Group. The Ghanaian Army relies on a mix of modern military technology and older varieties. While modern M16 s and equipment are standard issue, much of the secondary equipment used by the Ghanaian military is generally older than that used in Western military forces, and Ghanaian troops frequently rely on British, Brazil ian, Swiss, Swedish, Israel i, and Finnish weaponry. [ Peacekeeping ] { C-130 Hercules at } { Kotoka International Airport to take part in an } { ECOMOG mission in } { Liberia } The Ghanaian military is recognised as one of the most professional and up-to-date armed forces in West Africa, and as Ghana itself is a peaceful nation, enjoying stable relations with its neighbours in West Africa, Ghana is free to commit a large proportion of its armed forces to international peacekeeping operations. Such operations are mainly conducted in Africa, while large Ghanaian forces are frequently posted across the world as elements of United Nations peacekeeping forces. The United Nations has often relied on Ghanaian forces to conduct peacekeeping operations, in countries as diverse as Rwanda, Kosovo, and Lebanon. Currently, Ghanaian forces are posted to United Nations peacekeeping missions as follows: MONUC ( Democratic Republic of Congo ) - 464 UNMIL ( Liberia ) - 852 UNAMSIL ( Sierra Leone ) - 782 UNIFIL ( Lebanon ) - 651 Ghana provided the first Force Commander of the Economic Community of West African States Monitoring Group ( ECOMOG ), Lieutenant General Arnold Quainoo. Quainoo led the force from July 1990 to September 1990, before being superseded by a Nigerian officer in the aftermath of Liberian President Samuel Doe &apos;s death. [ Peacekeeping In Africa : Capabilities And Culpabilities Berman, Eric G. Sams, Katie E. 2000 United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research Geneva 92-9045-133-5 94–95 ] [ Air Force ] [ Ghana Air Force ] Ensign of the Ghana Air Force The Ghana Air Force is headquartered in Burma camp Accra, and operates from bases in Accra (main transport base), Tamale (combat and training base), Takoradi (training base), and Kumasi (support base). The Air Force&apos;s stated mission is to perform counterinsurgency operations within Ghana and to provide logistical support to the army. [ October 2008 ] Like the army, the air force suffers from frequent shortages of spare parts and poor maintenance of equipment. [ Navy ] [ Ghana Navy ] Ghanaian navy ships The Ghana Navy provides defence of Ghana and its territorial waters, fishery protection, and internal security on Lake Volta. It is also tasked with resupplying Ghanian peacekeepers in West Africa, fighting maritime criminal activities such as Piracy, disaster and humanitarian relief operations, and evacuation of Ghanian citizens and other nationals from troubled spots. In 1994 the navy was re-organized into an Eastern command, with headquarters at Tema, and a Western command, with headquarters at Sekondi-Takoradi. In the late 1980s and early 1990s, due to financial constraints and a lack of serviceable equipment, the navy temporarily shrank from about 1,200 personnel to around 850, but the numbers soon rose. By 2010, the navy had over 2000 personnel. [ Miscellaneous ] [ May 2012 ] Paramilitary forces deal with preventing and controlling civil disturbances and insurrection. Ghanaian statutory law officially prohibits civilians and foreign nationals from wearing military apparel such as camouflage clothing, or clothing which resembles military dress. Officially, fines and/or short prison sentences can be passed against civilians seen in military dress in public. However, this regulation is not enforced, and Ghanaian civilians are able to wear military-style apparel (such as civilian clothes in a camouflage finish) without any difficulties from law enforcement. In addition, Ghanaian law prohibits the photographing of police or military personnel and vehicles while on duty, strategic sites such as Kotoka International Airport when in use, and the seat of the Ghanaian government, Osu Castle. [ Chiefs of Defence Staff ] Source: official Ghana Armed Forces website Major General AGV Paley 1954 – 11 Jan 1960 Major General HT Alexander 1960 - 1961 Major General SJA Otu 1961 – 1965 Major General NA Aferi 1965 – 1966 Major /Lt General EK Kotoka 1966 - [ References ] [ Further reading ] General History of the Ghana Armed Forces – a Reference Volume, (Professor) Stephen Addae, Ministry of Defence of Ghana Armed Forces (sic), Accra, 2005, ISBN No 9988-8335-0-4. nearly 700 pages but quite readable. Very poor bibliography. [ External links ] Ghana Armed Forces, Ghana armed forces official website [ Military of ] de:Streitkräfte Ghanas hu:Ghána hadereje ru:Вооружённые силы Ганы