[ Smethport, Pennsylvania Borough McKean County Courthouse.jpg McKean County Courthouse Pennsylvania Country United States State Pennsylvania County McKean Borough council Mayor Ross Porter Settled 1807 Incorporated 1853 Imperial 4.4 1.7 2000 1684 389.3 1009.5 Eastern (EST) -5 EDT -4 inline,title region:US_type:city 41 48 36 N 78 26 42 W Zip code 16749 814 ] Smethport is a borough in McKean County, Pennsylvania, United States. The current mayor is Ross Porter. The population was 1,684 at the 2000 census. It is the county seat of McKean County [ 6 ]. [ History ] [ December 2010 ] The U.S. Route 6 borough of Smethport is in the midst of a community-wide renaissance based on a renewed awareness of its history, translating that history to define and build its future. Since the earliest days Smethport has been considered a topographic crown jewel of the Pennsylvania Wilds region. The moment the traveler enters Smethport they feel the hills wrap around them and from any direction they know that they have discovered a special place. A short drive from the Allegheny National Forest and Kinzua Bridge State Park, Smethport is about two hours from Erie and Buffalo and five hours from Philadelphia and New York City. The Smethport area is teaming with natural game, wildlife, and outdoor recreational opportunities. With its many festivals and events residents enjoy an active community and cultural life. The 1,700 residents have been bustling with renewed focus and interest as the Borough embraces opportunities and grass roots initiatives for economic and tourism development. It was in 1807 that Dutch land investors, while surveying a giant track of land they purchased from the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, discovered this most perfect valley and named it in honor of the Dutch banking family, the De Smeths, who financed their land investments. Smethport became the McKean County seat in 1826, and grew and thrived as the principal village of Keating Township. But it wasn’t until 1853, that Smethport officially was incorporated as a Borough. Prior to this, Smethport was simply a settlement surrounding the county courthouse. Part of the modern Smethport Renaissance is being driven by former residents returning or newcomers simply discovering that it is an excellent place to settle and start a business. Well educated and well traveled, they appreciate Smethport for its quality of life, charming small town demeanor, and low cost of living. The unique character and charm of this Pennsylvania Wilds community, coupled with high-speed Internet infrastructure makes Smethport a desirable place to launch a business. Smethport has a long and colorful entrepreneurial history. From its earliest days, creative innovation has been tied to the local environment. In 1822, John Applebee built a dam across Marvin Creek to create a millpond in the center of town and installed a water-powered sawmill. Thus began an entrepreneurial lumber industry with the naturally supplied power. Eventually the millpond at the center of Smethport became Hamlin Park and Hamlin Lake. Once filled with thousands of logs waiting processing at the local sawmill, the lake is now teaming with trout and offers opportunities for anglers. Today, just as in its past, Smethport is at the epicenter of major east coast hardwood industry and is home to the offices of forest industry giants. During the 1870s through early 1900s Smethport was in an economic explosion that created some of the wealthiest entrepreneurs in the country. Financier and Smethport benefactor Henry Hamlin was reported to be the wealthiest private banker in the United States during the 1890s. As a result of vast wealth generated by various aspects of the lumber industry and financiers Smethport was blessed with numerous exquisite mansions. The Smethport Mansion District is one of the community’s paramount attractions, and is one of the best-maintained historic architectural areas in the region. Examples of Victorian style architecture include Greek Revival, Queen Anne, Stick and Italianate. Visitors can view these masterpieces through walking tours that are offered periodically during special events, or by taking a casual stroll with the aid of the Smethport Mansion District walking tour guide. Smethport celebrates its ties to American Civil War. It was in 1861 that General Thomas Leiper Kane first mustered the McKean County Rifles and the famous and valiant Bucktail Regiment was born. Named for the whitetail deer tail placed in their hats, the Bucktails marched out of Smethport and into history. Smethport is home to an active group of Bucktail re-enactors who each April recreate this special piece of United States history. The first magnetic toys in the country were invented in Smethport in 1908. From out of those early roots would eventually come the famous 1955 hit toy “ Wooly Willy.” This famous 20th century toy was created by Jim Herzog in Smethport in 1955, when he worked for the family-owned business Smethport Specialty Co. Wooly Willy is celebrated by the town in June during Summer Fest when any Willy-want-to-be can enter the Wooly Willy look-alike contest to stake their claim with Smethport’s most famous son. With more than 50 million being sold, the child’s toy is one of the largest promoters of Smethport, which features the town’s name on every toy. Smethport was a center of bicycle hysteria during the 1890s. During September, Victorian Days Smethport relives part of its 1890s history by featuring its famous, “Wheel Around the Hub” 53-Mile Bicycle Race. Just as during the 1890s, the winners receive gold pocket watches as well as handsome cash prizes. Period costumed folk mingle with visitors as they wander through street art vendors and enjoy tea and live music on the courthouse green. Today bicycling is enjoyed on forested county roads and back woods trails that hub out from Smethport as well as on old railroad grades that are being converted in the “ rails-to-trails ” program. Trails for snowmobiles, cross-country skiers, mountain bikers and ATV riders snake through the area to be enjoyed both winter and summer. The local snowmobile association is working on a connection needed at Smethport to allow access to Pine Creek Gorge to Allegheny National Forest trail. Smethport became electrified in 1921 through the vision and persistence of Smethport industrialist and inventor J. C. Backus. The Borough has owned its own electric company since that time. Since the earliest days Smethport operated and serviced its transmission lines and purchased electricity from outside providers. Uniquely Smethport is the only municipality in the entire 12 county Pennsylvania Wilds Region to own its electric company. In 2004 Smethport was selected as Pennsylvania’s very first Route 6 Heritage Community. The borough is currently in the midst of a community-wide planning project supported by a DCNR grant to develop a Heritage Tourism Work Plan by identifying heritage tourist sites, resources and themes; by developing a way to enhance and refine these resources; and by creating a plan to sustain local heritage tourism while enhancing the local economy. Highlighted in the plan are an extensive community reforestation program, opportunities for business development including lodging, specialty stores and extended hours; cultural venues such as dances, concerts and plays; hospitality training; year-round event planning; streetscape enhancements; park improvements; signage and parking. The completed program is expected to take 10 years to plan and implement the various stages. We study history to learn what worked and what didn’t work; what was successful and what wasn’t. What did we do right that we should do again and what mistakes did we make so as not to repeat them. Lumbering and the logging industry has played a vital role in Smethport’s economy for Smethport’s entire history. Ever since John Applebee created the Hamlin Millpond and installed the up and down, water-powered, sawmill Smethport has focused on its regional lumber heritage. During the 1880s and 1890s giant, steam powered saw mills were located in the borough sawing millions of board feet of lumber and driving our economy. During the turn of the century 1900s wood chemical plants dotted McKean County and pumped money into the local economy. But these industries had a high price for the environment. The forests were denuded and toxic byproducts from the chemical industry polluted the soils. But it was this lumber industry that ignited out local economy and drove the economic engine that would create the Smethport Mansion District. To learn more about Smethport’s colorful past visit Planet Smethport &lt; www.smethporthistory.org &gt;, a virtual (Internet) walking tour of historic Smethport and nearby communities being created by students of Smethport Area High School. It features historic photos, newspaper clippings, and other information. With already over 2,200 pages the giant award winning project is still a work in progress. Route 6, passing over Bush Hill just east of the Borough, is the highest point in elevation on Route 6 east of the Mississippi River. [ Geography ] Smethport is located at [ 41 48 36 N 78 26 42 W type:city ] (41.809928, -78.444888) [ 1 ]. According to the United States Census Bureau, the borough has a total area of [ 1.7 sqmi km2 ], of which, [ 1.7 sqmi km2 ] of it is land and 0.60% is water. Smethport is at high altitude, namely [ 1488 ft m ] above sea level, and near Prospect Hill, the summit of which is the highest point in McKean County, rising above sea level [ 2495 ft m ]. The above photo is an aerial view of Smethport (looking west) taken on May 4, 2008. Click for a larger view. [ Demographics ] As of the census [ 2 ] of 2000, there were 1,684 people, 686 households, and 456 families residing in the borough. The population density was 1,009.5 people per square mile (389.3/km²). There were 739 housing units at an average density of 443.0 per square mile (170.9/km²). The racial makeup of the borough was 99.05% White, 0.53% African American, 0.06% Native American, 0.06% Asian, 0.12% from other races, and 0.18% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 0.59% of the population. There were 686 households out of which 33.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 52.8% were married couples living together, 10.6% had a female householder with no husband present, and 33.4% were non-families. 29.9% of all households were made up of individuals and 15.3% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.38 and the average family size was 2.94. In the borough the population was spread out with 26.0% under the age of 18, 6.7% from 18 to 24, 25.8% from 25 to 44, 22.7% from 45 to 64, and 18.9% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 40 years. For every 100 females there were 86.1 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 80.2 males. The median income for a household in the borough was $34,934, and the median income for a family was $42,153. Males had a median income of $30,962 versus $22,159 for females. The per capita income for the borough was $17,297. About 7.6% of families and 8.0% of the population were below the poverty line, including 9.4% of those under age 18 and 8.2% of those age 65 or over. [ Notable Businesses ] Smethport Specialty Company, which manufactures Wooly Willy and other magnetic toys. (Sold to Patch Products, August 2008.) America&apos;s First Christmas Store, opened in 1935 and was the nation&apos;s first year-round yuletide shop. (closed 2005) Hamlin Bank and Trust Company, a community bank founded by Henry Hamlin in 1863. &quot; Hamlin Bank &quot; Chef Specialties Company, founded in 1940, is America&apos;s first manufacturer and purveyor of pepper and spice mills. &quot; Chef Specialties &quot; Backus Company, a precision metal stamping manufacturer, founded in 1906. [ Education ] Smethport is served by the Smethport Area School District. It operates one elementary school and one high school. Smethport High School (left) and Elementary School (right). Click for a larger view. [ Trivia ] Home of the &quot; Hubbers &quot; - the local school district&apos;s mascot. Hubber refers to the fact that Smethport is in the approximate geographic center of McKean County and is the county seat; therefore it is the &quot; hub &quot; of the county. The logo for the school is an orange and black wagon wheel tilted to one side with the letters &quot; S &quot; and &quot; A &quot; for Smethport Area. Home of &quot; Wooly Willy &quot; magnetic toy produced by Smethport Specialty. Home of the U.S. record for 24 hour rainfall from a non-tropical system at 34  inches of rain. Lowest Recorded Temperature in Pennsylvania (Jan. 5, 1904): Smethport [ -42 °F °C on ] [ Notable people ] Jamie Dana USAF TSgt is the first military working dog handler to be allowed to adopt her dog from active duty. She sustained serious injuries with her dog, Rex, in Iraq from an improvised explosive device. Jamie and her dog attended the 2006 State of the Union Address as the guest of Laura Bush. [ References ] [ External links ] Smethport Borough - News Site Smethport Area School District Smethport History Smethport Area High School alumni Smethport, PA Weather and Webcam Category:County seats in Pennsylvania Category:Populated places established in 1807 Category:Boroughs in McKean County, Pennsylvania ca:Smethport es:Smethport fr:Smethport kw:Smethport, Pennsylvani ht:Smethport, Pennsilvani nl:Smethport pt:Smethport vo:Smethport