[ May 2011 ] While the first humans appeared in the area 40,000 years ago, the first records for the History of France appear in the Iron Age. What is now France made up the bulk of the region known to the Romans as Gaul. Roman writers noted the presence of three main ethno-linguistic groups in the area: the Gauls, the Aquitani, and the Belgae. The Gauls, the largest and best attested group, were a Celtic people speaking what is known as the Gaulish language. Over the course of the first millennium BC the Greeks, Romans, and Carthaginians established colonies on the Mediterranean coast and the offshore islands. The Roman Republic annexed southern Gaul as the province of Gallia Narbonensis in the late 2nd century BC, and Roman forces under Julius Caesar conquered the rest of Gaul in the Gallic Wars of 58–51 BC. Afterwards a Gallo-Roman culture emerged and Gaul was increasingly integrated into the Roman Empire. In the later stages of the Roman Empire, Gaul was subject to barbarian raids and migration, most importantly by the Germanic Franks. The Frankish king Clovis I united most of Gaul under his rule in the late 5th century, setting the stage for Frankish dominance in the region for hundreds of years. Frankish power reached its fullest extent under Charlemagne. The medieval Kingdom of France emerged out of the western part of Charlemagne&apos;s Carolingian Empire, known as West Francia, and achieved increasing prominence under the rule of the House of Capet, founded by Hugh Capet in 987. A succession crisis following the death of the last Capetian monarch in 1337 led to the series of conflicts known as the Hundred Years War between the House of Valois and the House of Plantagenet. The wars ended with a Valois victory in 1453, solidifying the power of the Ancien Régime as a highly centralized absolute monarchy. During the next centuries, France experienced the Renaissance and the Protestant Reformation, as well as recurring religious conflicts and wars with other powers. A burgeoning worldwide colonial empire was established from the 16th century. In the late 18th century the monarchy and associated institutions were overthrown in the French Revolution, which forever changed French and world history. The country was governed for a period as a Republic, until the French Empire was declared by Napoleon Bonaparte. Following Napoleon&apos;s defeat in the Napoleonic Wars France went through several further regime changes, being ruled as a monarchy, then briefly as a Second Republic, and then as a Second Empire, until a more lasting Third French Republic was established in 1870. France was one of the Triple Entente powers in World War I, fighting alongside the United Kingdom, Russia, and their allies against the Central Powers. It was one of the Allied Powers in World War II, but was conquered by Nazi Germany within two months. The Third Republic was dismantled, and most of the country was controlled directly by the Axis Powers, while the south was controlled by the collaborationist Vichy government. Following liberation, a Fourth Republic was established; this was succeeded in 1958 by the French Fifth Republic, the country&apos;s current government. After the war decolonization saw most of the French colonial empire become independent, while other parts were incorporated into the French state as overseas department s and collectivities. Since World War II France has been a leading member in the UN, the European Union and NATO, and remains a strong economic, cultural, military and political influence in the 21st century. [ Prehistory ] Cave painting in Lascaux. &lt; /s &gt; [ Prehistory of France ] The Neanderthal s, a member of the homo genus, were present in Europe from about 200,000 BC, but died out about 30,000 years ago, possibly out-competed by the modern humans during a period of cold weather. The earliest modern humans – Homo sapiens – entered Europe (including France) around 50,000 years ago (the Upper Palaeolithic ). The cave paintings of Lascaux and Gargas (Gargas in the Hautes-Pyrénées ) as well as the Carnac stones are remains of the local prehistoric activity. [ Ancient history ] [ Greek colonies ] [ Greeks in pre-Roman Gaul Colonies in antiquity#Greek colonies ] In 600 BC, Ionia n Greeks, originating from Phocaea, founded the colony of Massalia (present-day Marseille ), on the shores of the Mediterranean Sea, making it the oldest city of France. [ I. E. S. Edwards, ed. The Cambridge Ancient History http://books.google.com/books?id%3Dn1TmVvMwmo4C%26amp%3Bpg%3DRA1-PA754 1970 Cambridge U.P. 754 ] [ Claude Orrieux Pauline Schmitt Pantel A History of Ancient Greece http://books.google.com/books?id%3Db8cA8hymTw8C%26amp%3Bpg%3DPA62 1999 Blackwell 62 ] At the same time, some Gallic Celtic tribes penetrated some parts of the current territory of France, but this occupation spread in the rest of France only between the 5th and 3rd century BC. { Carpentier et al 2000, p.29 } [ Gaul ] [ Gaul ] { Massalia (modern } { Marseille ) silver coin with Greek legend, a testimony to } { Greeks in pre-Roman Gaul, 5th–1st century BCE. } Covering large parts of modern day France, Belgium, northwest Germany and northern Italy, Gaul was inhabited by many Celtic and Belgae tribes whom the Romans referred to as Gauls and who spoke the Gaulish language roughly between the Seine and the Garonne (Gallia Celtica). On the lower Garonne the people spoke Aquitanian, an archaic language related to Basque whereas a Belgian language was spoken north of Lutecia. The Celts founded cities such as Lutetia Parisiorum (Paris) and Burdigala (Bordeaux) while the Aquitanians founded Tolosa (Toulouse). Long before any Roman settlements, Greek navigators settled in what would become Provence. The Phoceans founded important cities such as Massalia (Marseille) and Nikaia (Nice), bringing them in to conflict with the neighboring Celts and Ligurians. Some Phocean great navigators, such as Pytheas, were born in Marseille. The Celts themselves often fought with Aquitanians and Germans, and a Gaulish war band led by Brennus invaded Rome c. 393 or 388 BC following the Battle of the Allia. However, the tribal society of the Gauls did not change fast enough for the centralized Roman state, who would learn to counter them. The Gaulish tribal confederacies were then defeated by the Romans in battles such as Sentinum and Telamon. In the early 3rd century BC, the Belgae conquered the surrounding territories of the Somme in northern Gaul after a battle supposedly against the Armoricani near Ribemont-sur-Ancre and Gournay-sur-Aronde, where sanctuaries were found. When Carthaginian commander Hannibal Barca fought the Romans, he recruited several Gaulish mercenaries who fought on his side at Cannae. It was this Gaulish participation that caused Provence to be annexed in 122 BC by the Roman Republic. [ December 2008 ] Later, the Consul of Gaul— Julius Caesar —conquered all of Gaul. Despite Gaulish opposition led by Vercingetorix, the Overking of the Warriors, the Gauls succumbed to the Roman onslaught. The Gauls had some success at first at Gergovia, but were ultimately defeated at Alesia. The Romans founded cities such as Lugdunum (Lyon) and Narbonensis (Narbonne). [ Roman Gaul ] [ Roman Gaul ] { Vercingetorix surrenders to } { Julius Caesar after } { Alesia. Painting by Lionel-Noël Royer, 1899. } Gaul was divided into several different provinces. The Romans displaced populations to prevent local identities from becoming a threat to Roman control. Thus, many Celts were displaced in Aquitania or were enslaved and moved out of Gaul. There was a strong cultural evolution in Gaul under the Roman Empire, the most obvious one being the replacement of the Gaulish language by Vulgar Latin. It has been argued the similarities between the Gaulish and Latin languages favoured the transition. Gaul remained under Roman control for centuries and Celtic culture was then gradually replaced by Gallo-Roman culture. The Gauls became better integrated with the Empire with the passage of time. For instance, Marcus Antonius Primus, an important general of the Roman Empire, and Emperor Claudius were both born in Gaul, as were general Gnaeus Julius Agricola and emperor Caracalla. Antoninus Pius also came from a Gaulish family. In the decade following Valerian &apos;s capture by the Persians in 260, Postumus established a short-lived Gallic Empire, which included the Iberian Peninsula and Britannia, in addition to Gaul itself. Germanic tribes, the Franks and the Alamanni, entered Gaul at this time. The Gallic Empire ended with Emperor Aurelian &apos;s victory at Châlons in 274. Gaulish soldiers. A migration of Celts appeared in the 4th century in Armorica. They were led by the legendary king Conan Meriadoc and came from Britain. They spoke the now extinct British language, which evolved into the Breton, Cornish, and Welsh language s. In 418 the Aquitanian province was given to the Goths in exchange for their support against the Vandals. Those same Goths had previously sacked Rome in 410 and established a capital in Toulouse. The Roman Empire had difficulty responding to all the barbarian raids, and Flavius Aëtius had to use these tribes against each other in order to maintain some Roman control. He first used the Huns against the Burgundians, and these mercenaries destroyed Worms, killed king Gunther, and pushed the Burgundians westward. The Burgundians were resettled by Aëtius near Lugdunum in 443. The Huns, united by Attila became a greater threat, and Aëtius used the Visigoths against the Huns. The conflict climaxed in 451 at the Battle of Châlons, in which the Romans and Goths defeated Attila. The Roman Empire was on the verge of collapsing. Aquitania was definitely abandoned to the Visigoths, who would soon conquer a significant part of southern Gaul as well as most of the Iberian Peninsula. The Burgundians claimed their own kingdom, and northern Gaul was practically abandoned to the Franks. Aside from the Germanic peoples, the Vascones entered Wasconia from the Pyrenees and the Bretons formed three kingdoms in Armorica: Domnonia, Cornouaille and Broërec. { P. J. Heather, The Fall of the Roman Empire: A New History of Rome and the Barbarians (2007) } [ Frankish kingdoms (486–987) ] [ Frankish Empire ] [ List of Frankish Kings Merovingian Carolingian Renaissance Early Middle Ages ] { Battle of Tours. This battle is often considered of macro-importance in European and Islamic history. } In 486, Clovis I, leader of the Salian Franks, defeated Syagrius at Soissons and subsequently united most of northern and central Gaul under his rule. Clovis then recorded a succession of victories against other Germanic tribes such as the Alamanni at Tolbiac. In 496, pagan Clovis adopted Catholicism. This gave him greater legitimacy and power over his Christian subjects and granted him clerical support against the Arian Visigoths. He defeated Alaric II at Vouillé in 507 and annexed Aquitaine, and thus Toulouse, into his Frankish kingdom. The Goths retired to Toledo in what would become Spain. Clovis made Paris his capital and established the Merovingian Dynasty but his kingdom would not survive his death. Under Frankish inheritance traditions, all sons would inherit part of the land, so four kingdoms emerged: centered on Paris, Orléans, Soissons, and Rheims. Over time, the borders and numbers of Frankish kingdoms were fluid and changed frequently. Also during this time, the Mayors of the Palace, originally the chief advisor to the kings, would become the real power in the Frankish lands; the Merovingian kings themselves would be reduced to little more than figureheads. { Edward James, The Franks (1991) } By this time Muslim invaders had conquered Hispania and were threatening the Frankish kingdoms. Duke Odo the Great defeated a major invading force at Toulouse in 721 but failed to repel a raiding party in 732. The mayor of the palace, Charles Martel, defeated that raiding party at the Battle of Tours (actually the battle took place between Tours and Poitiers) and earned respect and power within the Frankish Kingdom. The assumption of the crown in 751 by Pepin the Short (son of Charles Martel) established the Carolingian dynasty as the Kings of the Franks. { Charlemagne } Carolingian power reached its fullest extent under Pepin&apos;s son, Charlemagne. In 771, Charlemagne reunited the Frankish domains after a further period of division, subsequently conquering the Lombards under Desiderius in what is now northern Italy (774), incorporating Bavaria (788) into his realm, defeating the Avars of the Danubian plain (796), advancing the frontier with Islamic Spain as far south as Barcelona (801), and subjugating Lower Saxony (804) after a prolonged campaign. In recognition of his successes and his political support for the Papacy, Charlemagne was crowned Emperor of the Romans, or Roman Emperor in the West, by Pope Leo III in 800. Charlemagne&apos;s son Louis the Pious (emperor 814–840) kept the empire united; however, this Carolingian Empire would not survive Louis I&apos;s death. Two of his sons – Charles the Bald and Louis the German – swore allegiance to each other against their brother – Lothair I – in the Oaths of Strasbourg, and the empire was divided among Louis&apos;s three sons ( Treaty of Verdun, 843). After a last brief reunification (884–887), the imperial title ceased to be held in the western realm, which was to form the basis of the future French kingdom. The eastern realm, which would become Germany, elected the Saxon dynasty of Henry the Fowler. { Derek Wilson, Charlemagne (2007) } Under the Carolingian s, the kingdom was ravaged by Viking raiders. In this struggle some important figures such as Count Odo of Paris and his brother King Robert rose to fame and became kings. This emerging dynasty, whose members were called the Robertines, were the predecessors of the Capetian Dynasty. Led by Rollo, some Vikings had settled in Normandy and were granted the land, first as counts and then as dukes, by King Charles the Simple, in order to protect the land from other raiders. The people that emerged from the interactions between the new Viking aristocracy and the already mixed Franks and Gallo-Romans became known as the Normans. [ Elisabeth M. C. Van Houts The Normans in Europe http://books.google.com/books?id%3DIarkHmOdjnsC%26amp%3Bpg%3DPA23 2000 Manchester U.P. 23 ] [ State building into the Kingdom of France (987–1453) ] [ France in the Middle Ages ] France was a very decentralised state during the Middle Ages. The authority of the king was more religious than administrative. The 11th century in France marked the apogee of princely power at the expense of the king when states like Normandy, Flanders or Languedoc enjoyed a local authority comparable to kingdoms in all but name. The Capetians, as they were descended from the Robertines, were formerly powerful princes themselves who had successfully unseated the weak and unfortunate Carolingian kings. The Carolingian Kings had nothing more than a royal title when the Capetian Kings added their principality to that title. The Capetians, in a way, held a dual status of King and Prince; as king they held the Crown of Charlemagne and as Count of Paris they held their personal fiefdom, best known as Île-de-France. The fact that the Capetians both held lands as Prince as well as in the title of King gave them a complicated status. Thus they were involved in the struggle for power within France as princes but they also had a religious authority over the Church of France as King. However, and despite the fact that the Capetian kings often treated other princes more as enemies and allies than as subordinates, their royal title was often recognised yet not often respected. The royal authority was so weak in some remote places that bandits were the effective power. { Georges Duby, France in the Middle Ages 987–1460: From Hugh Capet to Joan of Arc (1993), } Some of the king&apos;s vassals would grow so powerful that they would become some of the strongest rulers of western Europe. The Normans, the Plantagenets, the Lusignans, the Hautevilles, the Ramnulfids, and the House of Toulouse successfully carved lands outside of France for themselves. The most important of these conquests for French history was the Norman Conquest of England, following the Battle of Hastings, by William the Conqueror because it linked England to France through Normandy. Although the Normans were now both vassals of the French kings and their equals as Kings of England, their zone of political activity remained centered in France. { David Carpenter The Struggle for Mastery. The Penguin history of Britain 1066–1284 p. 91: &quot; In the first place, after 1072 William was largely an absentee. Of the 170 months remaining of his reign he spent around 130 in France, returning to England only on four occasions. This was no passing phase. Absentee kings continued to spend at best half their time in England until the loss of Normandy in 1204... But this absenteeism solidified rather than sapped royal government since it engendered structures both to maintain peace and extract money on the king&apos;s absence, money which was above all needed across the channel &quot;. } These Norman nobles then commissioned the weaving of the Bayeux Tapestry. An important part of the French aristocracy also involved itself in the crusades, and French knights founded and ruled the Crusader states. An example of the legacy left in the Middle East by these nobles is the Krak des Chevaliers &apos; enlargement by the Counts of Tripoli and Toulouse. [ Rise of the monarchy ] The history of the monarchy is how it overcame the powerful barons over ensuing centuries, and established absolute sovereignty over France in the 16th century. The history of modern France starts with the election Hugh Capet (940-996), the Count of Paris in 987. Hugh&apos;s lands extended little beyond the Paris basin; His political unimportance weighed against the powerful barons who elected him. Many of the king&apos;s vassals (who included for a long time the kings of England) ruled over territories far greater than his own. A number of factors contributed to the rise of the French monarchy. The dynasty established by Hugh Capet continued uninterrupted until 1328. The laws of primogeniture ensured orderly successions of power. Secondly, the successors of Capet came to be recognised as members of an illustrious and ancient royal house and therefore socially superior to their politically and economically superior rivals. Thirdly, the Capetians had the support of the Church which favoured a strong central government in France. This alliance with the Church was one of the great enduring legacies of the Capetians. The First Crusade was composed almost entirely of Frankish Princes. As time went on the power of the King was expanded by conquests, seizures and successful feudal political battles. [ Marvin Perry et al. Margaret Jacob Western Civilization: Ideas, Politics, and Society: To 1789 http://books.google.com/books?id%3DXMKpq_nV0J8C%26amp%3Bpg%3DPA235 2008 Cengage Learning 235 ] { Abbey of Cluny, a } { Benedictine monastery, was the centre of monastic life revival in the } { Middle Ages and marked an important step in the cultural rebirth following the } { Dark Ages. } Hugh Capet was elected by an assembly summoned in Reims in 987. Capet was previously &quot; Duke of the Franks &quot; and then became &quot; King of the Franks &quot; (Rex Francorum). He was recorded to be recognised king by the Gauls, Bretons, Danes, Aquitanians, Goths, Spanish and Gascons. Hugh Capet&apos;s reign was marked by the loss of the Spanish marches as they grew more and more independent. Count Borell of Barcelona called for Hugh&apos;s help against Islamic raids, but even if Hugh intended to help Borell, he was otherwise occupied in fighting Charles of Lorraine. The loss of other Spanish principalities then followed. Hugh Capet, the first Capetian king, is not a well documented figure, his greatest achievement being certainly to survive as king and defeating the Carolingian claimant, thus allowing him to establish what would become one of Europe&apos;s most powerful house of kings. { William W. Kibler, ed. Medieval France: An Encyclopedia (1995) } Hugh&apos;s son – Robert the Pious – was crowned King of the Franks before Capet&apos;s demise. Hugh Capet decided so in order to have his succession secured. Robert II, as King of the Franks, met Emperor Henry II in 1023 on the borderline. They agreed to end all claims over each other&apos;s realm, setting a new stage of Capetian and Ottonian relationships. The reign of Robert II was quite important because it involved the Peace and Truce of God and the Cluniac Reforms. Although a king weak in power, Robert II&apos;s efforts were considerable. His surviving charters imply he was heavily relying on the church to rule France, much like his father did. Although he lived with a mistress — Bertha of Burgundy — and was excommunicated because of this, he was regarded as a model of piety for monks (hence his nickname, Robert the Pious). He crowned his son — Hugh Magnus — King of the Franks to secure his succession, however Hugh Magnus rebelled against his father and died fighting him. The next King of the Franks — Henry I — was crowned after Robert&apos;s death, which is quite exceptional for a French king of the times.Henry I was one of the weakest kings of the Franks, and his reign saw the rise of some very powerful nobles such as William the Conqueror. However his biggest source of concerns was his brother — Robert I of Burgundy — who was pushed by his mother to the conflict. Robert of Burgundy was made Duke of Burgundy by King Henry I and had to be satisfied with that title. From Henry I onward the Dukes of Burgundy were relatives of the King of the Franks until the end of the Duchy proper. King Philip I, named by his Kievan mother with a typically Eastern European name, was no more fortunate than his predecessor. { Kibler, ed. Medieval France: An Encyclopedia (1995) } { Godefroy de Bouillon, a French knight, leader of the } { First Crusade and founder of the } { Kingdom of Jerusalem. } It is from Louis VI onward that royal authority became more accepted. Louis VI was more a soldier and warmongering king than a scholar. The way the king raised money from his vassals made him quite unpopular; he was described as greedy and ambitious and that is corroborated by records of the time. His regular attacks on his vassals, although damaging the royal image, reinforced the royal power. From 1127 onward was a skilled politician – Abbot Suger. The abbot was the son of a minor family of knights, but his political advice was extremely valuable to the king. Louis VI successfully defeated, both military and politically, many of the robber baron s. Louis VI frequently summoned his vassals to the court, and those who did not show up often had their land possessions confiscated and military campaigns mounted against them. This drastic policy clearly imposed some royal authority on Paris and its surrounding areas. When Louis VI died in 1137, much progress had been made towards strengthening Capetian authority. Thanks to Abbot Suger&apos;s political advice, King Louis VII enjoyed greater moral authority over France than his predecessors. Even more powerful vassals such as Henry Plantagenet paid homage to the French king. { Capetian France 937–1328 p. 64: Then, in 1151, Henry Plantagenet paid homage for the duchy to Louis VII in Paris, homage he repeated as king of England in 1156. } Abbot Suger arranged the marriage between Louis VII and Eleanor of Aquitaine in Bordeaux which made Louis VII Duke of Aquitaine and gave him considerable power. However, the couple disagreed over the burning of more than a thousand people in Vitry during the conflict against the Count of Champagne. King Louis VII was deeply horrified by the event and sought penitence by going to the holy land. He later involved the Kingdom of France in the Second Crusade but his relationship with Eleanor did not improve. The marriage was ultimately annulled by the pope under the pretext of consanguinity and Eleanor soon married the Duke of Normandy — Henry Fitzempress — who would become King of England as Henry II two years later. Louis VII was once a very powerful monarch and was now facing a much stronger vassal, who was his equal as King of England and his strongest prince as Duke of Normandy and Aquitaine. Abbot Suger&apos;s vision of construction became known as the Gothic Architecture during the later Renaissance. This style became standard for most European cathedrals built in the late middle-age. { Paul Frankl, Gothic Architecture (2001) } [ The late Capetians (1165–1328) ] The late direct Capetian kings were considerably more powerful and influential than the earliest ones. While Philip I could hardly control his Parisian barons, Philip IV could dictate popes and emperors. The late Capetians, although they often ruled for a shorter time than their earlier peers, were often much more influential. This period also saw the rise of a complex system of international alliances and conflicts opposing, through dynasties, Kings of France and England and Holy Roman Emperor. [ Philip II Augustus ] The reign of Philip II Augustus marked an important step in the history of French monarchy. His reign saw the French royal domain and influence greatly expanded. He had set the context for the rise of power to much more powerful monarchs like Saint Louis and Philip the Fair. { Philip II victorious at } { Bouvines thus annexing Normandy and Anjou into his royal domains. This battle involved a complex set of alliances from three important states, the Kingdoms of France and England and the Holy Roman Empire. } Philip II spent an important part of his reign fighting the so-called Angevin Empire, which was probably the greatest threat to the King of France since the rise of the Capetian dynasty. During the first part of his reign Philip II tried using Henry II of England&apos;s son against him. He allied himself with the Duke of Aquitaine and son of Henry II — Richard Lionheart — and together they launched a decisive attack on Henry&apos;s castle and home of Chinon and removed him from power. Richard replaced his father as King of England afterward. The two kings then went crusading during the Third Crusade however their alliance and friendship broke down during the crusade. The two men were once again at odds and fought each other in France and Richard was on the verge of totally defeating Philip II. Adding to their battles in France the Kings of France and England were trying to install their respective allies at the head of the Holy Roman Empire. If Philip II Augustus supported Philip of Swabia, member of the House of Hohenstaufen, Richard Lionheart supported Otto IV, member of the House of Welf. Otto IV had the upper hand and became the Holy Roman Emperor at the expense of Philip of Swabia. The crown of France was saved by Richard&apos;s demise after a wound he received fighting his own vassals in Limousin. John Lackland, Richard&apos;s successor, refused to come to the French court for a trial against the Lusignan s and as Louis VI often did to his rebellious vassals, Philip II confiscated John&apos;s possessions in France. John&apos;s defeat was swift and his attempts to reconquer his French possession at the Battle of Bouvines resulted in complete failure. His allies, most notably Emperor Otto IV, were all defeated or captured and even as King of England he had no means to reconquer Normandy and Anjou. Not only had Philip II annexed Normandy and Anjou, he had captured the Counts of Boulogne and Flanders. Otto IV was overthrown by Frederick II, ally of Philip II of France and a member of the House of Hohenstaufen. The King of France however stopped before conquering Aquitaine and Gascony who remained loyal to the Plantagenet King. In addition to defeating John of England, Philip Augustus founded the Sorbonne and made Paris a city for scholars. Prince Louis (the future Louis VIII) was involved in the subsequent English civil war as French and English (or rather Anglo-Norman) aristocracies were once one and were now split between allegiances. While the French kings were struggling against the Plantagenets, the Church called for the Albigensian Crusade. Southern France was then largely absorbed in the royal domains. [ Saint Louis ] { Saint Louis. He saw France&apos;s cultural expansion in the Western Christian world. } France became a truly centralised kingdom under Louis IX, who initiated several administrative reforms. Saint Louis has often been portrayed as a one dimensional character, a flawless representant of the faith and an administrator caring for the governed ones. However, his reign was far from perfect for everyone; he made unsuccessful crusades and his expanding administrations raised oppositions; he also burned Jewish books at the Pope&apos;s urging. [ Gigot Francis E. Judaism 1910 The Catholic Encyclopedia VIII New York Robert Appleton Company http://www.newadvent.org/cathen/08399a.htm 13 August 2007 ] His judgments were not often practical, although they seemed fair by the standards of the time. It appears Louis had a strong sense of justice and always wanted to judge people himself before applying any sentence. This was said about Louis and French clergy asking for excommunications of Louis&apos; vassals: { Capetian France p. 265. } [ For it would be against God and contrary to right and justice if he compelled any man to seek absolution when the clergy were doing him wrong. ] Louis IX was only twelve years old when he became King of France, his mother — Blanche of Castile — was the effective power although the King was indeed Louis IX. Blanche&apos;s authority was strongly opposed by the French barons yet she could maintain her position as regent (although she did not formally use the title) until Louis was old enough to rule by himself. In 1229 the King had to struggle with a long lasting strike at the University of Paris, the Quartier Latin was strongly hit by these strikes. War was still going on in the County of Toulouse, the royal army was occupied fighting resistance in Languedoc and the kingdom was therefore vulnerable. Count Raymond VII of Toulouse finally signed the Treaty of Paris in 1229, in which he retained much of his lands to life, but his daughter, married to Count Alfonso of Poitou, produced him no heir and so the County of Toulouse went to the King of France. King Henry III of England had not yet recognized the Capetian overlordship over Aquitaine and still hoped to recover Normandy and Anjou and reform the Angevin Empire. He landed in 1230 at Saint-Malo with a massive force. Henry III&apos;s allies in Brittany and Normandy fell down because they did not dare fight their king who led the counterstrike himself. This evolved into the Saintonge War, Henry III was defeated and had to recognise Louis IX&apos;s overlordship although the King of France did not seize Aquitaine from Henry III. Louis IX was now the most important landowner of France, adding to his royal title. There were some opposition to his rule in Normandy, yet it proved remarkably easy to rule, especially compared to the County of Toulouse which had been brutally conquered. The Conseil du Roi, which would evolve into the Parlement, was founded in these times. Saint Louis also supported new forms of art such as Gothic architecture; his Sainte-Chapelle became a very famous gothic building, and he is also credited for the Morgan Bible. After his conflict with King Henry III of England Louis established a cordial relation with the Plantagenet King. An amusing anecdote is about Henry III&apos;s attending the French Parlement, as Duke of Aquitaine, the King of England was always late because he liked to stop each time he met a priest to hear the mass, so Louis made sure no priest was on the way of Henry III. Henry III and Louis IX then started a long contest in who was the most faithful up to the point none ever arrived anymore on time to the Parlement which was then allowed to debate in their absence. { Capetian France p. 264. } The Kingdom was involved in two crusades under Saint Louis: the Seventh Crusade and the Eighth Crusade. Both proved to be complete failures for the French King. He died in the Eighth Crusade and Philip III became king. Philip III took part in another crusading disaster: the Aragonese Crusade, which cost him his life. More administrative reforms were made by Philip the Fair. This king was responsible for the end of the Templars, signed the Auld Alliance, and established the Parlement of Paris. Philip IV was so powerful that he could name popes and emperors, unlike the early Capetians. The papacy was moved to Avignon and all the contemporary popes were French such as Philip IV&apos;s puppet: Bertrand de Goth. Capetian Dynasty Hugh Capet Robert the Pious Henry I Philip I Louis VI the Fat Louis VII the Young Philip II Augustus Louis VIII the Lion Saint Louis IX Philip III the Bold Philip IV the Fair Louis X the Quarreller John I the Posthumous Philip V the Tall Charles IV the Fair [ The early Valois Kings and the Hundred Years&apos; War (1328–1453) ] The tensions between the Houses of Plantagenet and the Capetian climaxed during the so-called Hundred Years&apos; War (actually several distinct wars) when the Plantagenets claimed the throne of France from the Valois. This was also the time of the Black Death, as well as several civil wars. The French population suffered much from these wars. In 1420 by the Treaty of Troyes Henry V was made heir to Charles VI. Henry V failed to outlive Charles so it was Henry VI of England and France who consolidated the Dual-Monarchy of England and France. It has been argued that the difficult conditions the French population suffered during the Hundred Years&apos; War awakened French nationalism, a nationalism represented by Joan of Arc. Although this is debatable, the Hundred Years&apos; War is remembered more as a Franco-English war than as a succession of feudal struggles. During this war, France evolved politically and militarily. Although a Franco-Scottish army was successful at Baugé, the humiliating defeats of Poitiers and Agincourt forced the French nobility to realise they could not stand just as armoured knights without an organised army. Charles VII established the first French standing army, the Compagnies d&apos;ordonnance, and defeated the Plantagenets once at Patay and again, using cannons, at Formigny. The Battle of Castillon was regarded as the last engagement of this &quot; war &quot;, yet Calais and the Channel Islands remained ruled by the Plantagenets. French Kings: Philip VI of Valois John II the Good Charles V the Wise Charles VI the Mad Charles VII the Well Served English interlude (between Charles VI and VII) Henry V of England Henry VI of England and France. [ Early Modern France (1453–1789) ] [ Early Modern France ] { Charles the Bold, the last Valois } { Duke of Burgundy, died at the } { Battle of Nancy. His death marked the division of his lands between the Kings of France and Habsburg Dynasty. } The Duke of Burgundy had assembled a large territory including his native duchy and the Burgundian Netherlands. King Louis XI faced Charles the Bold during Burgundian Wars and the French King was allied with the Old Swiss Confederacy. The Duke of Burgundy was defeated at Morat, Battle of Grandson, Héricourt and ultimately defeated at Nancy in 1477. The Duchy of Burgundy was annexed by France but the part of Burgundy that formed Franche-Comté was given to Philip I of Castile in 1493. From 1487 to 1491, France attacked and defeated Brittany, an independent duchy.In 1532, Brittany was incorporated into the Kingdom of France. [ Estates ] Political power was widely dispersed. The Catholic Church controlled about 40% of the wealth, tied up in long-term endowments that could be added to but not reduced. The king (not the pope) nominated bishops, but typically had to negotiate with noble families that had close ties to local monasteries and church establishments. The nobility came second in terms of wealth, but there was no unity as each noble had his own lands, his network of regional connections, and his own military force. The cities had a quasi-independent status, and were largely controlled by the leading merchants and guilds. Paris was by far the largest city with 220,000 people in 1547 and a history of steady growth. Lyons and Rouen each had about 40,000 population, but Lyon had a powerful banking community and a vibrant culture. Bordeaux was next with only 20,000 population in 1500. About 97% of France&apos;s 13 million people (in 1484) lived in rural villages. In many cases the peasants had well-established rights that the authorities had to respect. In terms of political power the law courts ( &quot; Parlements &quot; ) were powerful, especially that of France. The king had bout 10,000 officials in royal service—very few indeed for such a large country, and with very slow internal communications over an inadequate road system. (Travel was usually faster by ocean ship or river boat.) The different estates occasionally met together in the &quot; Estates General &quot;, but in practice it had no power, for it could petition the king but could not pass laws. The sense of &quot; being French &quot; was uncommon in 1500, as people clung to their local identities. By 1600, however, people were starting to call themselves &quot; bon françois. &quot; { Frederick J. Baumgartner, France in the Sixteenth Century (1995) pp 4-7 } [ Rural society ] In the 17th century peasants had ties to the market economy, provided much of the capital investment necessary for agricultural growth, and frequently moved from village to village (or town). Geographic mobility, directly tied to the market and the need for investment capital, was the main path to social mobility. The &quot; stable &quot; core of French society, town guildspeople and village labourers, included cases of staggering social and geographic continuity, but even this core required regular renewal. Accepting the existence of these two societies, the constant tension between them, and extensive geographic and social mobility tied to a market economy holds the key to a clearer understanding of the evolution of the social structure, economy, and even political system of early modern France. Collins (1991) argues that the Annales School paradigm underestimated the role of the market economy; failed to explain the nature of capital investment in the rural economy; and grossly exaggerated social stability. { James B. Collins, &quot; Geographic and Social Mobility in Early-modern France. &quot; Journal of Social History 1991 24(3): 563-577. Issn: 0022-4529 Fulltext: } { Ebsco. For the Annales interpretation see Pierre Goubert, The French Peasantry in the Seventeenth Century (1986) excerpt and text search } [ Wars ] France engaged in the long Italian Wars (1494–1559), which marked the beginning of early modern France. Francis I faced powerful foes, and he was captured at Pavia. The French monarchy then sought for allies and found one in the Ottoman Empire. The Ottoman Admiral Barbarossa captured Nice on 5 August 1543 and handed it down to Francis I. Around this same time, the Protestant Reformation, led in France mainly by John Calvin, was challenging the power of the Catholic Church in France. During the 16th century, the Spanish and Austrian Habsburgs were the dominant power in Europe. In addition to Spain and Austria, they controlled a number of kingdoms and duchies across Europe. Charles Quint, under the titles of Count of Burgundy, Holy Roman Emperor, and King of Aragon, Castile and Germany, among others, encircled France. The Spanish Tercio was used with great success against French knights. Finally, on 7 January 1558, the Duke of Guise seized Calais from the English. [ Language ] [ History of French ] Although most peasants in France spoke local dialects, an official language emerged in Paris and the French language became the preferred language of Europe&apos;s aristocracy. Holy Roman Emperor Charles V (born in 1500) quipped, &quot; I speak Spanish to God, Italian to women, French to men, and German to my horse. &quot; [ http://books.google.com/books?id%3DtCobBRiv3_MC%26amp%3Bpg%3DPA299 299 The letters of George Santayana: 1948–1952, Book 8 George Santayana, William G. Holzberger MIT Press, 2008 0-262-19571-2 31  July2008 ] Because of its international status, there was a desire to regulate the French language. Several reforms of the French language worked to make it more uniform. The Renaissance writer François Rabelais (b. 1494) helped to shape French as a literary language, Rabelais&apos; French is characterised by the re-introduction of Greek and Latin words. Jacques Peletier du Mans (born 1517) was one of the scholars who reformed the French language. He improved Nicolas Chuquet &apos;s long scale system by adding names for intermediate numbers ( &quot; milliards &quot; instead of &quot; thousand million &quot;, etc.). [ Colonies ] [ French colonial empire ] During the 16th century, the king established colonies and began to claim and settle North American territories. { Christopher Hodson and Brett Rushforth, &quot; Absolutely Atlantic: Colonialism and the Early Modern French State in Recent Historiography, &quot; History Compass, (Jan 2010) 8#1 pp 101-117, } Jacques Cartier was one of the great explorers who ventured deep into American territories during the 16th century. The largest settlement was New France, with the towns of Quebec City and Montreal with settlement commencing in the early 17th century with the voyages of Samuel de Champlain. { Allan Greer, &quot; National, Transnational, and Hypernational Historiographies: New France Meets Early American History, &quot; Canadian Historical Review, (2010) 91#4 pp 695-724, in Project MUSE } [ Huguenots ] [ French Wars of Religion ] { Henry IV of France, King of } { France and } { Navarre, was the first French } { Bourbon king. } Renewed Catholic reaction headed by the powerful duke of Guise, led to a massacre of Huguenots at Vassy in 1562, starting the first of the French Wars of Religion, during which English, German, and Spanish forces intervened on the side of rival Protestant and Catholic forces. In the most notorious incident, thousands of Huguenots were murdered in the St. Bartholomew&apos;s Day massacre of 1572. The Wars of Religion culminated in the War of the Three Henrys in which Henry III assassinated Henry de Guise, leader of the Spanish-backed Catholic league, and the king was murdered in return. Following this war Henry III of Navarre became king of France as Henry IV and enforced the Edict of Nantes (1598). { Mack P. Holt, The French Wars of Religion, 1562-1629 (2nd ed. 2005 } French Protestantism, which was largely Calvinist derived its support from the lesser nobles and trading classes. Its two main strongholds were south west France and Normandy, but even in these districts the Catholics were a majority. Protestantism in France was considered a grave threat to national unity, as the Huguenot minority felt a closer affinity with German and Dutch Calvinists than with their fellow Frenchmen. In an effort to cement their position they often allied with French enemies. The animosity between the two sides led to the French Wars of Religion and the St. Bartholomew&apos;s Day Massacre. The religious wars ended in 1593, when the Huguenot Henry of Navarre (1553-1610), who was already effectively king of France became a Catholic and was recognised by both Catholics and Protestants as King Henry IV (reigned 1589-1610). The main provisions of the Edict of Nantes (1598), which Henry IV had issued as a charter of religious freedoms for the Huguenots, were as follows; a) Huguenots were allowed to hold religious services in certain towns in each province; b) They were allowed to control and fortify eight cities (including La Rochelle and Montauban ); c) Special courts were established to try Huguenot offenders; d)Huguenots were to have equal civil rights with the Catholics. The military privileges were incorporated in the Edict in order to allay the fears of the minority. Over time it became clear these privileges would be open to abuse and when in 1620 the Huguenots proclaimed a constitution for the &apos;Republic of the Reformed Churches of France&apos;, the Prime Minister Cardinal Richelieu (1585–1642) invoked the entire powers of the state. Religious conflicts therefore resumed under Louis XIII when Richelieu forced Protestants to disarm their army and fortresses. This conflict ended in the Siege of La Rochelle (1627–1628), in which Protestants and their English supporters were defeated. The following Peace of Alais confirmed religious freedom yet dismantled the Protestant defences. { Mack P. Holt, The French Wars of Religion, 1562-1629 (2nd ed. 2005 } In the face of persecution, Huguenots dispersed widely throughout Protestant kingdoms in Europe and America. { Randy J. Sparks and Bertrand Van Ruymbeke, Memory and Identity: The Huguenots in France and the Atlantic Diaspora (2008) } [ Thirty Years war ] [ Thirty Years War ] The religious conflicts that plagued France also ravaged the Habsburg-led Holy Roman Empire. The Thirty Years War eroded the power of the Catholic Habsburgs. Although Cardinal Richelieu, the powerful chief minister of France, had previously mauled the Protestants, he joined this war on their side in 1636 because it was the raison d&apos;état. Imperial Habsburg forces invaded France, ravaged Champagne, and nearly threatened Paris. Richelieu died in 1642 and was succeeded by Cardinal Mazarin, while Louis XIII died one year later and was succeeded by Louis XIV. France was served by some very efficient commanders such as Louis II de Bourbon (Condé) and Henry de la Tour d&apos;Auvergne (Turenne). The French forces won a decisive victory at Rocroi (1643), and the Spanish army was decimated; the Tercio was broken. The Truce of Ulm (1647) and the Peace of Westphalia (1648) brought an end to the war. But some challenges remained. France was hit by civil unrest known as the Fronde which in turn evolved into the Franco-Spanish War in 1653. Louis II de Bourbon joined the Spanish army this time, but suffered a severe defeat at Dunkirk (1658) by Henry de la Tour d&apos;Auvergne. The terms for the peace inflicted upon the Spanish kingdoms in the Treaty of the Pyrenees (1659) were harsh, as France annexed Northern Catalonia. { Peter H. Wilson, Europe’s Tragedy: A History of the Thirty Years War (2009) } Amidst this turmoil, René Descartes sought answers to philosophical questions through the use of logic and reason and formulated what would be called Cartesian Dualism in 1641. [ Louis XIV ] [ Louis XIV ] { Louis XIV, the &quot; Sun King &quot; } Louis XIV, known as the &quot; Sun King &quot;, wanted to be remembered as a patron of the arts, like his ancestor Louis IX. He invited Jean-Baptiste Lully to establish the French opera. A tumultuous friendship was established between Lully and Molière. Jules Hardouin Mansart became France&apos;s most important architect of the period. Louis XIV&apos;s long reign saw France involved in many wars that drained its treasury. His reign began during the Thirty Years&apos; War and during the Franco-Spanish war. His military architect, Vauban, became famous for his pentagonal fortresses, and Jean-Baptiste Colbert supported the royal spending as much as possible. French dominated League of the Rhine fought against the Ottoman Turks at the Battle of Saint Gotthard in 1664. The battle was won by the Christians, chiefly through the brave attack of 6,000 French troops led by La Feuillade and Coligny. { Count Miklós Zrínyi,the Poet-Warlord } France fought the War of Devolution against Spain in 1667. France&apos;s defeat of Spain and invasion of the Spanish Netherlands alarmed England and Sweden. With the Dutch Republic they formed the Triple Alliance to check Louis XIV&apos;s expansion. Louis II de Bourbon had captured Franche-Comté, but in face of an indefensible position, Louis XIV agreed to a peace at Aachen. Under its terms, Louis XIV did not annex Franche-Comté but did gain Lille. { John B. Wolf, Louis XIV (1968), the standard scholarly biography online edition } Peace was fragile, and war broke out again between France and the Dutch Republic in the Franco-Dutch War (1672–1678). Louis XIV asked for the Dutch Republic to resume war against the Spanish Netherlands, but the republic refused. France attacked the Dutch Republic and was joined by England in this conflict. Through targeted inundations of polder s by breaking dykes, the French invasion of the Dutch Republic was brought to a halt. The Dutch Admiral Michiel de Ruyter inflicted a few strategic defeats on the Anglo-French naval alliance and forced England to retire from the war in 1674. Because the Netherlands could not resist indefinitely, it agreed to peace in the Treaties of Nijmegen, according to which France would annex France-Comté and acquire further concessions in the Spanish Netherlands. On 6 May 1682, the royal court moved to the Palace of Versailles, which Louis XIV had greatly expanded. Peace did not last, and war between France and Spain again resumed. The War of the Reunions broke out (1683–1684), and again Spain, with its ally the Holy Roman Empire, was easily defeated. Meanwhile, in October 1685 Louis signed the Edict of Fontainebleau ordering the destruction of all Protestant churches and schools in France. Its immediate consequence was a large Protestant exodus from France. The two massive famine s struck France between 1693 and 1710, killing over two million people. [ Ó Gráda Cormac Chevet, Jean-Michel 2002 Famine And Market In Ancient RégimeFrance The Journal of Economic History 62 706–733 10.1017/S0022050702001055 17494233 3 ] France would soon be involved in another war, the War of the Grand Alliance. This time the theatre was not only in Europe but also in North America. Although the war was long and difficult (it was also called the Nine Years War), its results were inconclusive. The Treaty of Ryswick in 1697 confirmed French sovereignty over Alsace, yet rejected its claims to Luxembourg. Louis also had to evacuate Catalonia and the Palatinate. This peace was considered a truce by all sides, thus war was to start again. In 1701 the War of the Spanish Succession began. The Bourbon Philip of Anjou was designated heir to the throne of Spain. The Habsburg Emperor Leopold opposed a Bourbon succession, because the power that such a succession would bring to the Bourbon rulers of France would disturb the delicate balance of power in Europe. Therefore, he claimed the Spanish thrones for himself. England and the Dutch Republic joined Leopold against Louis XIV and Philip of Anjou. The allied forces were led by John Churchill and by Prince Eugene of Savoy. They inflicted a few resounding defeats to the French army; the Battle of Blenheim in 1704 was the first major land battle lost by France since its victory at Rocroi in 1643. Yet, after the extremely bloody battles of Ramillies and Malplaquet, Pyrrhic victories for the allies, they had lost too many men to continue the war. Led by Villars, the French forces recovered much of the lost ground in battles such as Denain. Finally, a compromise was achieved with the Ultrecht in 1713. Philip of Anjou was confirmed as Philip V, king of Spain, and Emperor Leopold did not get the throne, but Philip V was barred from inheriting France. { Wolf, Louis XIV (1968) } [ Ancien Régime ] [ Ancien Régime in France ] France in the Ancien Régime covered a territory of around [ 200000 sqmi km2 ], and supported 20 million people in 1700. At least 80% of the population were peasants. France had the second largest population in Europe around 1700. Britain had five or six million, Spain had eight million, and the Austrian Habsburgs had around eight million. Russia was the most populated European country at the time. France&apos;s lead slowly faded after 1700, as other countries grew faster. { Pierre Goubert, The Ancien Regime (1973) pp. 2-9. } The population was predominantly rural. In the 17th century rich peasants who had ties to the market economy provided much of the capital investment necessary for agricultural growth, and frequently moved from village to village (or town). Geographic mobility, directly tied to the market and the need for investment capital, was the main path to social mobility. The &quot; stable &quot; core of French society, town guildspeople and village laboureurs, included cases of staggering social and geographic continuity, but even this core required regular renewal. Accepting the existence of these two societies, the constant tension between them, and extensive geographic and social mobility tied to a market economy holds the key to a clearer understanding of the evolution of the social structure, economy, and even political system of early modern France. Collins (1991) argues that the Annales School paradigm underestimated the role of the market economy; failed to explain the nature of capital investment in the rural economy; and grossly exaggerated social stability. { James B. Collins, &quot; Geographic and Social Mobility in Early-Modern France, &quot; Journal of Social History (1991) 24#3 pp 563-577 in JSTOR For the Annales interpretation see Pierre Goubert, The French Peasantry in the Seventeenth Century (1986) excerpt and text search } [ Wars ] [ Seven Years&apos; War ] [ French Renaissance French colonization of the Americas Age of Enlightenment ] Louis XIV died in 1715 and was succeeded by his five-year-old great grandson who reigned as Louis XV until his death in 1774. In 1718, France was once again at war, as Philip II of Orléans &apos;s regency joined the War of the Quadruple Alliance against Spain. King Philip V of Spain had to withdraw from the conflict confronted with the reality that Spain was no longer a great power of Europe. Under Cardinal Fleury &apos;s administration, peace was maintained as long as possible. However, in 1733 another war broke in central Europe, this time about the Polish succession, and France joined the war against the Austrian Empire. This time there was no invasion of the Netherlands, and Britain remained neutral. As a consequence, Austria was left alone against a Franco-Spanish alliance and faced a military disaster. Peace was settled in the Treaty of Vienna (1738), according to which France would annex, through inheritance, the Duchy of Lorraine. { Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie, The Ancien Regime: A History of France 1610–1774 (1999) } Two years later, in 1740, war broke out over the Austrian succession, and France seized the opportunity to join the conflict. The war played out in North America and India as well as Europe, and inconclusive terms were agreed to in the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle (1748). Once again, no one regarded this as a peace, but rather as a mere truce. Prussia was then becoming a new threat, as it had gained substantial territory from Austria. This led to the Diplomatic Revolution of 1756, in which the alliances seen during the previous war were mostly inverted. France was now allied to Austria and Russia while Britain was now allied to Prussia. In the North American theatre, France was allied with various Native American peoples during the Seven Years&apos; War and, despite a temporary success at the battles of the Great Meadows and Monongahela, French forces were defeated at the disastrous Battle of the Plains of Abraham in Quebec. In Europe, repeated French attempts to overwhelm Hanover failed. In 1762 Russia, France and Austria were on the verge of crushing Prussia, when the Anglo-Prussian Alliance was saved by the Miracle of the House of Brandenburg. At sea naval defeats against British fleets at Lagos and Quiberon Bay in 1759 and a crippling blockade forced France to keep its ships in port. Finally peace was concluded in the Treaty of Paris (1763), and France lost its North American empire. { Daniel Marston, The Seven Years&apos; War (2001) } Britain&apos;s success had allowed them to eclipse France as the leading colonial power. France sought revenge for this defeat, and under Choiseul France started to rebuild. In 1766 the French Kingdom annexed Lorraine and the following year bought Corsica from Genoa. { Lord Cornwallis surrenders at } { Yorktown to American and French allies. } Having lost its colonial empire, France saw a good opportunity for revenge against Britain in signing an alliance with the Americans in 1778, and sending an army and navy that turned the American Revolution into a world war. Spain, allied to France by the Family Compact, and the Dutch Republic also joined the war on the French side. Admiral de Grasse defeated a British fleet at Chesapeake Bay while Jean-Baptiste Donatien de Vimeur, comte de Rochambeau and Gilbert du Motier, marquis de La Fayette joined American forces in defeating the British at Yorktown. The war was concluded by the Treaty of Paris (1783), under which Britain lost its former American colonies. Despite this the war had largely been a disappointment for France, it had been extremely expensive and they had only received Tobago for their efforts. { Jonathan R. Dull, A Diplomatic History of American Revolution (1985) } While the state expanded, new ideas broke on the role of the king and the powers of the state. Charles de Secondat, baron de Montesquieu described the separation of powers. Many other French philosophers and intellectuals gained social, political and philosophical influence on a global scale, including Voltaire, Denis Diderot and Jean-Jacques Rousseau, whose essay The Social Contract, Or Principles of Political Right was a catalyst for governmental and societal reform throughout Europe. Science, mathematics and technology also flourished. French scientists such as Antoine Lavoisier worked to replace the archaic units of weights and measures by a coherent scientific system, commissioned by king Louis XVI. Lavoisier also formulated the law of Conservation of mass and discovered oxygen and hydrogen. { Daniel Roche, France in the Enlightenment (1998) ch 15 } The Early Modern period in French history spans the following reigns, from 1461 to the Revolution, breaking in 1789: Louis XI the Prudent Charles VIII the Affable Louis XII Francis I Henry II and Catherine de&apos; Medici Francis II Charles IX Henry III { House of Bourbon } Henry IV the Great the Regency of Marie de Medici Louis XIII the Just and his minister Cardinal Richelieu the Regency of Anne of Austria and her minister Cardinal Mazarin Louis XIV the Sun King and his minister Jean-Baptiste Colbert the Régence of Philip II of Orléans Louis XV the Beloved and his minister Cardinal André-Hercule de Fleury Louis XVI [ Enlightenment ] [ Age of Enlightenment ] 250px The &quot; Philosophes &quot; were eighteenth century French intellectuals who dominated the French Enlightenment and were influential across Europe. Their interests were diverse, with experts in scientific, literary, philosophical and sociological matters. The ultimate goal of the philosophes was human progress; by concentrating on social and material sciences, they believed that a rational society was the only logical outcome of a freethinking and reasoned populace. They also advocated Deism and religious tolerance. Many believed religion had been used as a source of conflict since time eternal, and that logical, rational thought was the way forward for mankind. { Peter Hanns Reill and Ellen Judy Wilson, Encyclopædia of the Enlightenment(2nd ed. 2004) } The philosophe Denis Diderot was Editor in Chief of the famous Enlightenment accomplishment, the 72,000 article Encyclopédie (1751-1772). It sparked a revolution in learning throughout the enlightened world. { Arthur Wilson, Diderot, the Appeal to Posterity, 1759-1784 (1972) } In the early part of the 18th century the movement was dominated by Voltaire and Montesquieu, but the movement grew in momentum as the century moved on. Overall the Philosophes were inspired by the thoughts of René Descartes, the skepticism of the Libertins and the popularisation of science by Bernard de Fontenelle. Sectarian dissensions within the church, the gradual weakening of the absolute monarch and the numerous wars of Louis XIV allowed their influence to spread. Between 1748-1751 the Philosophes reached their most influential period, as Montesquieu published Spirit of Laws (1748) and Jean Jacques Rousseau published Discourse on the Moral Effects of the Arts and Sciences (1750). The representative leaders of the French Enlightenment--a writer of enormous influence across Europe--was Voltaire (1694-1778). His many books included poems and plays, works of satire ( Candide [1759]) and books on history, science and philosophy, including numerous (anonymous) contributions to the Encyclopédie, and an extensive correspondence. A witty, tireless antagonist to the alliance between the French state and the church, he was exiled from France on a number of occasions. In exile in England he came to appreciate British thought and he popularized Isaac Newton in Europe. { Nicholas Cronk, ed. The Cambridge Companion to Voltaire (2009) } [ Revolution and Napoleon (1789–1815) ] [ The Revolution ] [ French Revolution ] { Storming of the Bastille, 14 July 1789 } The immediate trigger for the Revolution was Louis XVI&apos;s attempts to solve the government&apos;s worsening financial situation. In February 1787 his finance minister, Charles Alexandre de Calonne, convened an Assembly of Notables, a group of nobles, clergy, bourgeoisie, and bureaucrats selected in order to bypass the local parliaments. This group was asked to approve a new land tax that would, for the first time, include a tax on the property of nobles and clergy. The assembly did not approve the tax, instead demanding that Louis XVI call the Estates-General. In August 1788 the King agreed to convene the Estates-General in May 1789. While the Third Estate demanded and was granted &quot; double representation &quot; so as to balance the First and Second Estate, voting was to occur &quot; by orders &quot; – votes of the Third Estate were to be weighted – effectively canceling double representation. This eventually led to the Third Estate breaking away from the Estates-General and, joined by members of the other estates, proclaiming the creation of the National Assembly, an assembly not of the Estates but of &quot; the People. &quot; In an attempt to keep control of the process and prevent the Assembly from convening, Louis XVI ordered the closure of the Salle des États where the Assembly met. After finding the door to their chamber locked and guarded, the Assembly met nearby on a tennis court and pledged the Tennis Court Oath on 20 June 1789, binding them &quot; never to separate, and to meet wherever circumstances demand, until the constitution of the kingdom is established and affirmed on solid foundations. &quot; They were joined by some sympathetic members of the Second and First estates. After the king fired his finance minister, Jacques Necker, for giving his support and guidance to the Third Estate, worries surfaced that the legitimacy of the newly formed National Assembly might be threatened by royalists. Paris was soon consumed with riots, anarchy, and widespread looting. Because the royal leadership essentially abandoned the city, the mobs soon had the support of the French Guard, including arms and trained soldiers. On 14 July 1789, the insurgents set their eyes on the large weapons and ammunition cache inside the Bastille fortress, which also served as a symbol of royal tyranny. Insurgents seized the Bastille prison, killing the governor and several of his guards. The French now celebrate 14 July each year as a symbol of the shift away from the Ancien Regime to a more modern, democratic state. Gilbert du Motier, a hero of the War of American Independence, took command of the National Guard, and the king was forced to recognize the Tricolour Cockade. Although peace was made, several nobles did not regard the new order as acceptable and emigrated in order to push the neighboring, aristocratic kingdoms to war against the new democratic regime. Because of this new period of instability, the state was struck for several weeks in July and August 1789 by the Great Fear, a period of violent class conflict. The Declaration of the Rights of Man and Citizen was adopted by the National Assembly in August 1789 as a first step in their effort to write a constitution. Considered to be a precursor to modern international rights instruments and using the U.S. Declaration of Independence as a model, it defined a set of individual rights and collective rights of all of the estates as one. Influenced by the doctrine of natural rights, these rights were deemed universal and valid in all times and places, pertaining to human nature itself. The Assembly also replaced France&apos;s historic provinces with eighty-three departments, uniformly administered and approximately equal to one another in extent and population. On 4 August 1789, the Assembly abolished feudalism, in what became known as the August Decrees, sweeping away both the seigneurial rights of the Second Estate and the tithes gathered by the First Estate. In the course of a few hours, nobles, clergy, towns, provinces, companies, and cities lost their special privileges. The Assembly abolished the symbolic paraphernalia of the Ancien Régime, armorial bearings, liveries, etc., which alienated the more conservative nobles. Amidst these intrigues, the Assembly continued to work on developing a constitution. A new judicial organization made all magistracies temporary and independent of the throne. The legislators abolished hereditary offices, except for the monarchy itself. Jury trials started for criminal cases. The King would have the unique power to propose war, with the legislature then deciding whether to declare war. The Assembly abolished all internal trade barriers and suppressed guilds, masterships, and workers&apos; organizations. Consequently, an individual could only gain the right to practice a trade through the purchase of a license and worker strikes became illegal. The Revolution brought about a massive shifting of powers from the Roman Catholic Church to the state. Under the Ancien Régime, the Church had been the largest landowner in the country. Legislation enacted in 1790 abolished the Church&apos;s authority to levy a tax on crops, cancelled special privileges for the clergy, and confiscated Church property. The Assembly essentially addressed the financial crisis in part by having the nation take over the property of the Church. The republican government also enforced the Système International d&apos;Unités, commissioned by Louis XVI, which became known as the Metric System. Charles-Augustin de Coulomb and André-Marie Ampère &apos;s works on electricity and electromagnetism were also recognised, and their units are integrated into the Metric System. When a mob from Paris attacked the royal palace at Versailles in October 1789 seeking redress for their severe poverty, the royal family was forced to move to the Tuileries Palace in Paris. Later in June 1791, the royal family secretly fled Paris in disguise for Varennes near France&apos;s northeastern border in order to seek royalist support the king believed he could trust, but they were soon discovered en route. They were brought back to Paris, after which they were essentially kept under house-arrest at the Tuileries. Factions within the Assembly began to clarify. The opposition to revolution sat on the right-hand side of the Assembly. The &quot; Royalist democrats &quot; or monarchiens inclined toward organizing France along lines similar to the British constitutional model. The &quot; National Party &quot;, representing the centre or centre-left of the assembly represented somewhat more extreme views. The increasingly middle-class National Guard under Lafayette also slowly emerged as a power in its own right. With most of the Assembly still favoring a constitutional monarchy rather than a republic, the various groupings reached a compromise that left Louis XVI little more than a figurehead. He had perforce to swear an oath to the constitution, and a decree declared that retracting the oath, heading an army for the purpose of making war upon the nation, or permitting anyone to do so in his name would amount to de facto abdication. Under the Constitution of 1791, France would function as a constitutional monarchy. The King had to share power with the elected Legislative Assembly, but he still retained his royal veto and the ability to select ministers. The Legislative Assembly first met on 1 October 1791 and degenerated into chaos less than a year later. The Legislative Assembly consisted of about 165 Feuillants (constitutional monarchists) on the right, about 330 Girondists (liberal republicans) in the center, a vocal group of Jacobins (radical revolutionaries) on the left, and about 250 deputies unaffiliated with any of those factions. Early on, the King vetoed legislation that threatened the émigrés with death and that decreed that every non-juring clergyman must take within eight days the civic oath mandated by the Civil Constitution of the Clergy. Over the course of a year, disagreements like this would result in a constitutional crisis, leading the Revolution to higher levels. On the foreign affairs front, in the Declaration of Pillnitz of August 1791 Emperor Leopold II, Count Charles of Artois and King William II of Prussia made Louis XVI&apos;s cause their own. These noblemen also required the Assembly to be dissolved through threats of war, but, instead of cowing the French, it infuriated them. The borders were militarised as a consequence. Under the Constitution of 1791, the solution of a constitutional monarchy was adopted, and the king supported a war against Austria in order to increase his popularity, starting the long French Revolutionary Wars. On the night of the 10 August, the Jacobins, who had mainly opposed the war, suspended the monarchy. With the Prussian army entering France, more doubts were raised against the aristocracy, and these tensions climaxed during the September Massacres. After the first great victory of the French revolutionary troops at the Battle of Valmy on 20 September 1792, the French First Republic was proclaimed the next day, on 21 September 1792. The new French Republican Calendar was then legally enforced. The Mountain is the English translation for the French word, Montagne, which was the radical political faction of the National Convention who considered themselves the true patriots of the French Revolution. { Andress, David. The Terror. p. 118 } Customarily, its members, called Montagnards, sat on the highest tiered benches in the Convention hall, therefore giving the party its name. An alternate meaning of the name, one more metaphorical, implied that mountains are a natural, pure landscape preferred to the corruption of the city, which was represented by its opposing faction, the Girondins. { Andress, David. The Terror. p. 131 } The Mountain had 302 members during its reign in 1793 and 1794, including committee members and deputies who voted with the faction. { Patrick, Alison. &quot; Political Divisions in the French National Convention 1792–93 &quot; p. 436 } Most of its members came from the middle class and tended to represent the Parisian population. { Palmer, R.R. Twelve Who Ruled. p. 26 } Its leaders included Maximilien Robespierre, Jean-Paul Marat, and Georges Danton. { Palmer, R.R. Twelve Who Ruled. p. 25 } This party eventually gained overwhelming power in the Convention and governed France during the Reign of Terror. The Montagnards and the Girondins were both originally Jacobins, a political club which was founded according to republican beliefs and whose members wanted a French democratic republic. [ Jack Richard Censer Lynn Avery Hunt Liberty, Equality, Fraternity: Exploring the French Revolution http://books.google.com/books?id%3DOSDNl6Ydq_oC 2001 Penn State U.P. 64 ] The Jacobin Club, however, encountered political tension beginning in 1791 due to conflicting viewpoints in response to several revolutionary events and how to best achieve a democratic republic. { David Andress, The Terror p. 381 } As a result, two factions emerged: the Girondins and the Montagnards. The latter sided with the Parisian militants, also known as the sans-culottes, who aimed for a more repressive form of government that would institute a price maximum on essential consumer goods and would punish all traitors and enemies of the Republic. { Censer, Liberty, Equality, Fraternity pp. 64,74 } Additionally, between war and political differences, the Montagnards believed these crises required emergency solutions. { Hugh Gough, The Terror in the French Revolution p. 31 } Possibly the two most significant factors in the quarrel and consequential split between the Montagnards and the Girondins include the Trial of King Louis XVI and the September Massacres. The official fall of the monarchy came on 10 August 1792 after Louis XVI refused to rescind his veto of the constitution of the National Assembly. The Mountain argued for immediate execution of the king by military court-martial, insisting that he was undermining the Revolution. Because a trial would require the &quot; presumption of innocence, &quot; such a proceeding would contradict the mission of the National Convention. The Girondins, in contrast, agreed that the king was guilty of treason but argued for his clemency and favored the option of exile or popular referendum as his sentence. { Censer, Liberty, Equality, Fraternity, pp. 64–66 } However, the trial progressed and Louis XVI was executed by guillotine on 21 January 1793. The second key factor in the split between the Montagnards and the Girondins was the September Massacres of 1792. Radical Parisians, members of the National Guard, and fédérés were angry with the poor progress in the war against Austria and Prussia and the forced enlistment of 30,000 volunteers. On 10 August, radicals went on a killing spree, slaughtering roughly 1,300 inmates in various Paris prisons, many of whom were simply common criminals, not the treasonous counterrevolutionaries condemned by the Mountain. { Patrice Higonnet, Goodness Beyond Virtue p. 37 } The Girondins did not tolerate the massacres, but neither the Montagnards of the Legislative Assembly nor the Paris Commune took any action to stop or condemn the killings. Members of the Girondins later accused Marat, Robespierre, and Danton as inciters of the massacres in an attempt to further their dictatorial power. { Paul R. Hanson, The Jacobin Republic Under Fire p. 40-41 } Members of the Mountain went on to establish the Committee of Public Safety under Robespierre, which would be responsible for the Terror, the bloodiest and one of the most controversial phases of the French Revolution. The time between 1792 and 1794 was dominated by the ideology of the Mountain until the execution of Robespierre on 28 July 1794. { Louis XV, had stood. } When the Brunswick Manifesto of July 1792 once more threatened the French population with Austrian (Imperial) and Prussian attacks, Louis XVI was suspected of treason and taken along with his family from the Tuileries Palace in August 1792 by insurgents supported by a new revolutionary Paris Commune. The King and Queen ended up prisoners, and a rump session of the Legislative Assembly suspended the monarchy. Little more than a third of the deputies were present, almost all of them Jacobins. The King was later tried and convicted and, on 21 January 1793, was executed by the guillotine. Marie Antoinette, would follow him to the guillotine on 16 October. What remained of a national government depended on the support of the insurrectionary Commune. When the Commune sent gangs into prisons to arbitrarily adjudicate and butcher 1400 victims, and then addressed a circular letter to the other cities of France, inviting them to follow this example, the Assembly could offer only feeble resistance. This situation persisted until a National Convention, charged with writing a new constitution, met on 20 September 1792 and became the new de facto government of France. The next day it abolished the monarchy and declared a republic. When the war went badly, prices rose, and the sans-culottes (poor labourers and radical Jacobins) rioted, counter-revolutionary activities began in some regions. This encouraged the Jacobins to seize power through a parliamentary coup, backed up by force effected by mobilising public support against the Girondist faction, and by utilising the mob power of the Parisian sans-culottes. An alliance of Jacobin and sans-culottes elements thus became the effective centre of the new government. Policy became considerably more radical. In September 1793 a period known as the Reign of Terror ensued for approximately 12 months. The Committee of Public Safety, set up by the National Convention on 6 April 1793, formed the de facto executive government of France. Under war conditions and with national survival seemingly at stake, the Jacobins under Maximilien Robespierre centralized denunciations, trials, and executions under the supervision of this committee of twelve members. At least 18,000 people met their deaths under the guillotine or otherwise, after accusations of counter-revolutionary activities. In 1794, Robespierre had ultra-radicals and moderate Jacobins executed. As a consequence of these actions, however, Robespierre&apos;s own popular support eroded markedly. On 27 July 1794, the Thermidorian Reaction led to the arrest and execution of Robespierre. The new government was predominantly made up of Girondists who had survived the Terror and, after taking power, they took revenge as well by banning the Jacobin Club and executing many of its former members in what was known as the White Terror. After the stated aim of the National Convention to export revolution, the guillotining of Louis XVI of France, and the French opening of the Scheldt, a military coalition was formed and set up against France. Spain, Naples, Great Britain and the Netherlands joined Austria and Prussia in The First Coalition (1792–1797), the first major concerted effort of multiple European powers to contain Revolutionary France. It took shape after the wars had already begun. The Republican government in Paris was radicalised after a diplomatic coup from the Jacobins and said it would be the Guerre Totale and called for a Levée en masse. Royalist invasion forces were defeated at Toulon in 1793, leaving the French republican forces in an offensive position and granting a young officer, Napoleon Bonaparte, a certain fame. Following their victory at Fleurus, the Republicans occupied Belgium and the Rhineland. An invasion of the Netherlands established the puppet Batavian Republic. Finally, a peace agreement was concluded between France, Spain and Prussia in 1795 at Basel. The Convention approved a new &quot; Constitution of the Year III &quot; on 17 August 1795; it was ratified by a national plebiscite and took effect on 26 September 1795. [ Gregory Fremont-Barnes Encyclopedia of the Age of Political Revolutions and New Ideologies, 1760-1815 http://books.google.com/books?id%3D6_2wkP4j-EsC%26amp%3Bpg%3DPA159 2007 Greenwood Publishing Group 159 ] The new constitution created the Directory and the first bicameral legislature in French history. The parliament consisted of 500 representatives – le Conseil des Cinq-Cents (the Council of the Five Hundred) – and 250 senators – le Conseil des Anciens (the Council of Elders). Executive power went to five &quot; directors &quot;, named annually by the Conseil des Anciens from a list submitted by le Conseil des Cinq-Cents. The nation desired rest and the healing of its many wounds. Those who wished to restore Louis XVIII and the Ancien Régime and those who would have renewed the Reign of Terror were insignificant in number. The possibility of foreign interference had vanished with the failure of the First Coalition. Nevertheless, the four years of the Directory were a time of arbitrary government and chronic disquiet. The late atrocities had made confidence or goodwill between the parties impossible. As the majority of French people wanted to be rid of them, they could achieve their purpose only by extraordinary means. The Convention habitually disregarded the terms of the constitution, and, when the elections went against them, appealed to the sword. They resolved to prolong the war as the best expedient for prolonging their power. They were thus driven to rely upon the armies, which also desired war and were becoming increasingly less civic in temper. The Directory lasted until 1799 when Napoleon staged a coup and installed the Consulate. The Consulate still operated within the First Republic, was replaced by the First Empire, established by Napoleon in 1804. [ David Nicholls Napoleon: A Biographical Companion http://books.google.com/books?id%3DPmCdv91zPS0C%26amp%3Bpg%3DPA81 1999 ABC-CLIO 81 ] [ The Napoleonic Era ] [ Napoleonic wars ] { Jean Auguste Dominique Ingres } During the War of the First Coalition the Directoire had replaced the National Convention. Five directors then ruled France. As Great Britain was still at war with France, a plan was made to take Egypt from the Ottoman Empire, a British ally. This was Napoleon &apos;s idea and the Directoire agreed to the plan in order to send the popular general away from the mainland. Napoleon defeated the Ottoman forces during the Battle of the Pyramids and sent hundreds of scientists and linguists out to thoroughly explore modern and ancient Egypt. Unexpectedly the British fleet under Admiral Nelson, destroyed the French fleet at the Battle of the Nile. Napoleon planned to move into Syria but was defeated and he returned to France without his army. It surrendered. { Paul Strathern, Napoleon in Egypt (2009) } The Directoire was threatened by the Second Coalition. Royalists and their allies still dreamed of restoring the monarchy to power, while the Prussian and Austrian crowns did not accept their territorial losses during the previous war. The Russian army expelled the French from Italy in battles such as Cassano while the Austrian army defeated the French in Switzerland at Stockach and Zurich. Napoleon then seized power through a coup and established the Consulate in 1799. The Austrian army was defeated at Marengo in 1800 and again at Hohenlinden. While at sea the French had some success at Boulogne but Nelson&apos;s Royal Navy destroyed an anchored Danish and Norwegian fleet at Copenhagen because the Scandinavian kingdoms were against the British blockade on France. The Second Coalition was beaten and peace was settled in two distinct treaties: The Treaty of Lunéville and the Treaty of Amiens. A brief interlude of peace ensued in 1802-3, during which Napoleon sold French Louisiana to the United States because it was indefensible. { George F. Nafziger, Historical Dictionary of the Napoleonic Era (2002) } In 1801 Napoleon concluded a &quot; Concordat &quot; with Pope Pius VII that opened peaceful relations between church and state in France. The policies of the Revolution were reversed—except the Church did not get its lands back. Bishops and clergy were to receive state salaries and the government paid for the building and maintenance of churches. { Nigel Aston, Religion and revolution in France, 1780-1804 (2000) p 324 } Napoleon reorganized higher learning by dividing the Institut National into four (later five) academies. Of permanent importance was the Napoleonic Code created by eminent jurists under Napoleon&apos;s supervision. Praised for its Gallic clarity, it spread rapidly throughout Europe and the world in general, and marked the end of feudalism and the liberation of Jews where it took effect. { Alexander Grab, Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe (2003) } The Code recognized the principles of civil liberty, equality before the law, and the secular character of the state. It discarded the old right of primogeniture (where only the eldest son inherited) and required that inheritances be divided equally among all the children. The court system was standardized; all judges were appointed by the national government in Paris. { Pierre Goubert, The Course of French History (1991) ch 14 } In 1804 Napoleon was titled Emperor by the senate, thus founding the French Empire. Napoleon&apos;s rule was constitutional, and although autocratic, it was much more advanced than traditional European monarchies of the time. The proclamation of the French Empire was met by the Third Coalition. The French army was renamed the Grande Armée in 1805 and Napoleon used propaganda and nationalism to control the French population. The French army achieved a resounding victory at Ulm, where an entire Austrian army was captured. However, a Franco-Spanish fleet was defeated at Trafalgar and all plans to invade Britain were then made impossible. Despite this naval defeat, it was on the ground that this war would be won, Napoleon inflicted the Austrian and Russian Empires one of their greatest defeats at Austerlitz, destroying the third coalition. The peace was settled in the Treaty of Pressburg, the Austrian Empire lost the title of Holy Roman Emperor and the Confederation of the Rhine was created by Napoleon over former Austrian territories. { Robert P. Goetz, 1805: Austerlitz: Napoleon and the Destruction of the Third Coalition, (2005) } { Battle of Austerlitz, by } { François Gérard } Prussia joined Britain and Russia, thus forming the Fourth Coalition. Although the Coalition was joined by other allies, the French Empire was also not alone since it now had a complex network of allies and submitted states. Largely outnumbered, the Prussian army was crushed at Jena-Auerstedt in 1806, Napoleon captured Berlin and went as far as Eastern Prussia. There the Russian Empire was defeated at the Battle of Friedland. Peace was dictated in the Treaties of Tilsit, in which Russia had to join the Continental System and Prussia handed down half of its territories to France. The Duchy of Warsaw was formed over these territorial losses, and the Polish troops entered the Grande Armée in significant numbers. { First Empire } Freed from his obligation in the east, Napoleon then went back to the west, as the French Empire was still at war with Britain. Only two countries remained neutral in the war: Sweden and Portugal, and Napoleon then looked toward the latter. In the Treaty of Fontainebleau, a Franco-Spanish alliance against Portugal was sealed as Spain eyed Portuguese territories. French armies entered Spain in order to attack Portugal, but then seized Spanish fortresses and took over the kingdom by surprise. Joseph Bonaparte, Napoleon&apos;s brother, was made King of Spain after Charles IV &apos;s abdication. This occupation of the Iberian peninsula fueled local nationalism, and soon the Spanish and Portuguese would fight the French using guerilla tactics, defeating the French forces at the Battle of Bailén. Britain sent a short-lived ground support force to Portugal, and French forces evacuated Portugal as defined in the Convention of Sintra following the Allied victory at Vimeiro. France was only controlling Catalonia and Navarre and could have been definitely expelled from the Iberian peninsula had the Spanish armies attacked again, but the Spanish did not. Another French attack was launched on Spain, led by Napoleon himself, and was described as &quot; an avalanche of fire and steel. &quot; However, the French Empire was no longer regarded as invincible by European powers. In 1808 Austria formed the War of the Fifth Coalition in order to break down the French Empire. The Austrian Empire defeated the French at Aspern-Essling, yet was beaten at Wagram while the Polish allies defeated the Austrian Empire at Raszyn. Although not as decisive as the previous Austrian defeats, the peace treaty caused Austria to lose a large amount of territories, reducing it even more. { Adolf Northern } In 1812 war broke out with Russia, engaging Napoleon in the disastrous Patriotic War. Napoleon assembled the largest army Europe had ever seen, including troops from all submitted states, to invade Russia, which had just left the continental system and was gathering an army on the Polish frontier. Following an exhausting march and the bloody but inconclusive Battle of Borodino, near Moscow, the Grande Armée entered and captured Moscow, just to find it burning, as part of the Russian scorched earth tactics. Although there still were battles such as Maloyaroslavets the Napoleonic army left Russia decimated most of all by the Russian winter, exhaustion and scorched earth warfare. On the Spanish front the French troops were defeated at Vitoria and then at the Battle of the Pyrenees. Since the Spanish guerrillas seemed to be uncontrollable, the French troops eventually evacuated Spain. France having been defeated on these two fronts, the states controlled and previously conquered by Napoleon saw a good opportunity to strike back. The Sixth Coalition was formed and the German states of the Confederation of the Rhine switched sides, finally opposing Napoleon. Napoleon was largely defeated in the Battle of the Nations and was overwhelmed by much larger armies during the Six Days Campaign, although, because of the much larger amount of casualties suffered by the allies, the Six Days Campaign is often considered a tactical masterpiece. Napoleon abdicated on 6 April 1814, and was exiled to Elba. The conservative Congress of Vienna reversed the political changes that had occurred during the wars. Napoleon&apos;s attempted restoration, a period known as the Hundred Days, ended with his final defeat at Waterloo in 1815. The monarchy was subsequently restored and Louis XVIII became king. [ Long nineteenth century, 1815–1914 ] [ France in the long nineteenth century ] The seemingly timeless world of the French peasantry swiftly changed from 1870 to 1914. French peasants had been poor and backward until railroads, republican schools, and universal military conscription modernized rural France. The centralized government in Paris had the goal of creating a unified nation state, so it required all students be taught standardized French. In the process a new national identity was forged. { Eugen Weber, Peasants into Frenchmen: The Modernization of Rural France, 1890–1914 (1976). } [ Bourbon restoration: 1814–1830 ] This period of time is called the Bourbon Restoration and was marked by conflicts between reactionary Ultra-royalists, who wanted to restore the pre-1789 system of absolute monarchy, and liberals, who wanted to strengthen constitutional monarchy. Louis XVIII was the younger brother of Louis XVI, and reigned from 1814 to 1824. On becoming king, Louis issued a constitution known as the Charter which preserved many of the liberties won during the French Revolution and provided for a parliament composed of an elected Chamber of Deputies and a Chamber of Peers that was nominated by the king. However the right to vote in elections to the Chamber of Deputies was restricted to only the wealthiest men. Louis was succeeded in turn by a younger brother, Charles X, who reigned from 1824 to 1830. On 12 June 1830 Polignac, King Charles X &apos;s minister, exploited the weakness of the Algerian Dey by invading Algeria and establishing French rule in Algeria. { Albert Guerard, France: A Modern History (1959) p. 293. } However, the news of the fall of Algiers had barely reached Paris when a new revolution broke out and quickly resulted in a change of regime. [ July Monarchy 1830–1848 ] Protest against the absolute monarchy was in the air. The elections of deputies to the 16 May 1830 had gone very badly for King Charles X. { Guerard, France: A Modern History (1959) p. 287. } Charles X reacted by proroguing the Chamber of Deputies and sending them all packing, and then unilaterally changed the electional laws in an attempt to create a new Chamber of Deputies more favorable to him, and muzzled the press. Opposition to the absolute monarchy was immediately expressed in the streets of Paris as suppressed deputies, gagged journalists, students from the University and many working men of Paris poured into the streets and erected barricades during the &quot; three glorious days &quot; (French Les Trois Glorieuses) of 26–29 July 1830. Charles X was deposed and replaced by King Louis-Philippe in what is known as the July Revolution. The July Revolution is traditionally regarded as a rising of the bourgeoisie against the absolute monarchy of the Bourbons. Participants in the July Revolution included Marie Joseph Paul Ives Roch Gilbert du Motier, marquis de Lafayette. Working behind the scenes on behalf of the bourgeois propertied interests was Louis Adolphe Thiers. Thiers was perfectly willing to see changes made in the government so long as property was not harmed. Thiers wanted the &quot; middle class accommodated &quot; with the vote realizing that, ironically, although the petty bourgeoisie (the inn and cafe keepers, restaurant owners, wine merchants, small traders, shop keepers, handicraftsmen, etc.) were all being ruined by the rise of the larger bourgeoisie that the petty bourgeoisie remained strong supporters of property interests. Lafayette believed the Orleanist constitutional monarchy was the safest course for the propertied interests and so Lafayette and Thiers became supporters of the Orleanist &quot; Citizen King &quot; -- Louis-Philippe.Consequently, Louis-Philippe became &quot; king by the grace of the barricades. &quot; { Guerard, France: A Modern History (1959) p. 291. } Louis-Philippe&apos;s &quot; July Monarchy &quot; (1830–1848) was dominated by the haute bourgeoisie (high bourgeoisie) of bankers, financiers, industrialists and merchants. During the reign of the July Monarchy, the Romantic Era was starting to bloom. Driven by the Romantic Era, an atmosphere of protest and revolt was all around in France. On 22 November 1831 in Lyon (the second largest city in France) the silk workers revolted and took over the town hall in protest of recent salary reductions and working conditions. This was one of the first occasions of a workers revolt in the entire world. { Guerard, France: A Modern History (1959) p. 294. } The revolt was vigorously put down by Casimir Perier. The Right was also unhappy with the July Monarchy. On 28 October 1836, Prince Louis-Napoleon, son of Napoleon&apos;s brother, Louis, King of Holland attempted to overthrow the July Monarchy in a coup d&apos;état. It failed but in August 1840, Prince Louis Napoleon tried another coup at Boulogne with hired soldiers. It failed as well. { Phillip Guedalla, The Second Empire (1923) pp. 18-90, 120-26. } Because of the constant threats to the throne, the July Monarchy began to rule with a stronger and stronger hand. Soon political meetings were outlawed. However, &quot; banquets &quot; were still legal and all through 1847, there was a nation-wide campaign of democracy and/or republican banquets. The climaxing banquet was scheduled for 22 February 1848 in Paris but the government banned it. In response citizens of all classes poured out onto the streets of Paris in a revolt against the July Monarchy. Demands were made for abdication of &quot; Citizen King &quot; Louis-Phillipe and for establishment of a representative democracy in France. [ Maurice Agulhon The Republican Experiment, 1848-1852 http://books.google.com/books?id%3DW9XFC28uLNIC%26amp%3Bpg%3DPA23 1983 Cambridge University Press 23–40 ] Representative classes in this revolt included the full range of French society from the industrial bourgeoisie (who had been excluded from the &quot; finance aristocracy &quot; that formed the major part of the bourgeoisie that supported the July Monarchy), the petty bourgeoisie and the workers. Louis-Phillipe abdicated, and the French Second Republic was proclaimed. A Constituent Assembly was elected which was seated in Paris. Alphonse Marie Louis de Lamartine, who had been a leader of the moderate republicans in France during the 1840s became the Minister of Foreign Affairs in the Provisional Government that was established by this Assembly. In reality Lamartine was the virtual head of government in 1848. { Elizabeth Wormeley Latimer, France in the nineteenth century, 1830-1890 (1892) ch 7 pp 125-49 online } [ Napoleon III: 1848–1871 ] Napoleon III, Emperor of the French Frustration among the laboring classes arose when the Constituent Assembly did not address the concerns of the workers. Strikes and worker demonstrations became more common as the workers gave vent to these frustrations. These demonstrations reached a climax when on 15 May 1848, workers from the secret societies broke out in armed uprising against the anti-labor and anti-democratic policies being pursued by the Constituent Assembly and the Provisional Government. Fearful of a total breakdown of law and order, the Provisional Government invited General Louis Eugene Cavaignac back from Algeria, in June 1848, to put down the worker&apos;s armed revolt. From June 1848 until December 1848 General Cavaignac became head of the executive of the Provisional Government. { William Fortescue, France and 1848: the end of monarchy (2005) p. 130 } Louis Napoleon Bonaparte was elected president on 10 December 1848 by a landslide. His support came from a wide section of the French public. Various classes of French society voted for Louis Napoleon for very different and often contradictory reasons. { Fortescue, France and 1848: the end of monarchy (2005) p. 135 } Louis Napoleon, himself encouraged this contradiction by &quot; being all things to all people. &quot; One of his major promises to the peasantry and other groups was that there would be no new taxes. The new National Constituent Assembly was heavily composed of royalist symphathizers of both the Legitimist (Bourbon) wing and the Orleanist (Citizen King Louis Phiippe) wing. Because of the ambiguity surrounding Louis Napoleon&apos;s political positions, his agenda as president was very much in doubt. For prime minister, he selected Odilon Barrot, an unobjectionable middle-road parliamentarian, who had led the &quot; loyal opposition &quot; under Louis-Philippe. Other appointees represented various royalist factions. { T. A. B. Corley, Democratic Despot: A Life of Napoleon III (1961) pp 74-77 } As part of the Revolutions of 1848, The Pope was forced out of Rome and Louis Napoleon sent a 14,000 man expeditionary force of troops to the Papal State under General Nicolas Charles Victor Oudinot to restore him. In late April, 1849, it was defeated and pushed back from Rome by Giuseppi Garibaldi &apos;s volunteer corps, then recovered and recaptured Rome. { Guérard, France: A Modern History, p. 305. } In the &quot; June Days &quot; of 1849 demonstrations against the government broke out and were suppressed. Leaders were arrested, including prominent politicians. The government banned several democratic and socialist newspapers in France; the editors were arrested. Karl Marx was at risk so he moved to London in August. [ Maurice Agulhon The Republican Experiment, 1848-1852 http://books.google.com/books?id%3DW9XFC28uLNIC%26amp%3Bpg%3DPA23 1983 Cambridge U.P. 78-80 ] The government sought ways to balance its budget and reduce its debts. Toward this end, Hippolyte Passy was appointed Finance Minister. When the Legislative Assembly met at the beginning of October, 1849, Passy proposed an income tax to help balance the finances in France. The bourgeoisie, who would pay most of the tax, protested. The furor over the income tax caused the resignation of Barrot as prime minister, but a new wine tax also caused protests. [ Maurice Agulhon The Republican Experiment, 1848-1852 http://books.google.com/books?id%3DW9XFC28uLNIC%26amp%3Bpg%3DPA23 1983 Cambridge U.P. 117-38 ] The 1850 elections resulted in a conservative body. It passed the Falloux Laws giving education into the hand of the Catholic clergy. It opened an era of cooperation between Church and state that lasted until the Ferry laws reversed course in 1879. The Fallous laws provided universal primary schooling in France and expanded opportunities for secondary schooling. In practice, the curricula in Catholic and state schools were similar. Catholic schools were especially useful in schooling for girls, which had long been neglected. { Patrick J. Harrigan, &quot; Church, State, and Education in France From the Falloux to the Ferry Laws: A Reassessment, &quot; Canadian Journal of History, (2001) 36#1 pp 51-83 } Although a new electoral law was passed which respected the principle of universal (male) suffrage, the stricter residential requirement of the new law actually had the effect of disenfranchising 3,000,000 of 10,000,000 voters. { Albert Guérard, France: A Modern History, pp. 305-306. } As 1851 opened, Louis Napoleon was not allowed by the Constitution of 1848 to seek re-election as President of France. { Philip Guedalla, The Second Empire p. 203. } Instead he proclaimed himself President for Life following a coup in December that was confirmed and accepted in a dubious referendum. Napoleon III of France took the imperial title in 1852 and held it until his downfall in 1870. The era saw great industrialization, urbanization (including the massive rebuilding of Paris by Baron Haussmann ) and economic growth, but Napoleon III&apos;s foreign policies were not so successful. In 1854, The Second Empire joined the Crimean War, which saw France and Britain opposed to the Russian Empire, who were decisively defeated at Sevastopol in 1855 and at Inkerman. In 1856 France joined the Second Opium War on the British side against China; a missionary&apos;s murder was used as a pretext to take interests in southwest Asia in the Treaty of Tientsin. In 1859 the Second Italian War of Independence broke out between the northern Italian kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia and Austria. The Second French Empire joined the war on the Italian side, which was concluded by an Austrian defeat at Solferino. In return for this intervention, Piedmont ceded the County of Nice (which included the city of Nice and the rugged Alpine territory to its north and east) and the Duchy of Savoy. In 1861 Napoleon III largely supported Maximilian in his claim to Mexico, a move that was also supported by Britain and Spain but condemned by the U.S. This led to the French intervention in Mexico, which turned out to be a failure. When France was negotiating with The Netherlands about purchasing Luxembourg, the Prussian Kingdom threatened the French government with war. This came as a shock to French diplomats as there previously was an agreement between the Prussian and French governments about Luxembourg. Napoleon III suffered stronger and stronger criticism from Republicans like Jules Favre, and his position seemed more fragile with the passage of time. France was looking for more interests in Asia and interfered in Korea in 1866 taking, once again, missionaries&apos; murders as a pretext. The French finally withdrew from the war with little gain but war&apos;s booty. The next year a French expedition to Japan was formed to help the Tokugawa shogunate to modernize its army. However, Tokugawa was defeated during the Boshin War at the Battle of Toba-Fushimi by large Imperial armies. Rising tensions in 1869 about the possible candidacy of Prince Leopold von Hohenzollern -Sigmaringen to the throne of Spain, caused a rise in the scale of animosity between France and Germany. { H. w. Koch, A History of Prussia (Dorset Press, New York, 1978) pp. 265–266. } Prince Leopold was a part of the Prussian royal family. He had been asked by the Spanish Cortes to accept the vacant throne of Spain. Such an event was more than France could possibly accept. Relations between France and Germany deteriorated and finally, the Franco-Prussian War (1870–1871) broke out. German nationalism united the German states, with the exception of Austria, against Napoleon III. The French Empire was defeated decisively at Metz and Sedan. Indeed, Emperor Louis Napoleon III surrendered himself and 100,000 French troops to the German troops at Sedan on 1 September through 2, 1870. { Guèrard, p. 324. } Two days later, on 4 September 1870, Leon Gambetta proclaimed a new republic in France. { William L. Shirer, The Collapse of the Third Republic (Simon &amp; Shuster: New York, 1969) p. 36. } Later when Paris was encircled by German troops, Gambetta fled Paris by means of a hot air balloon and he became the virtual dictator of the war effort which was carried on from the rural provinces. { Guérard, p. 325. } Metz remained under siege until 27 October 1870, when 173,000 French troops were located there finally surrendered. Surrounded Paris and was forced to surrender on 28 January 1871. The last straw was the Siege of Paris. The Treaty of Frankfurt allowed the newly formed German Empire to annex the provinces of Alsace and Lorraine. { Guérard, p. 326. } [ Railways ] [ History of rail transport in France ] Railways became a national medium for the modernization of backward regions, and a leading advocate of this approach was the poet-politician Alphonse de Lamartine. One writer hoped that railways might improve the lot of &quot; populations two or three centuries behind their fellows &quot; and eliminate &quot; the savage instincts born of isolation and misery. &quot; Consequently, France built a centralized system that radiated from Paris (plus lines that cut east to west in the south). This design was intended to achieve political and cultural goals rather than maximize efficiency. After some consolidation, six companies controlled monopolies of their regions, subject to close control by the government in terms of fares, finances, and even minute technical details. The central government department of Ponts et Chaussées [roads and bridges] brought in British engineers and workers, handled much of the construction work, provided engineering expertise and planning, land acquisition, and construction of permanent infrastructure such as the track bed, bridges and tunnels. It also subsidized militarily necessary lines along the German border, which was considered necessary for the national defense. Private operating companies provided management, hired labor, laid the tracks, and built and operated stations. They purchased and maintained the rolling stock—6,000 locomotives were in operation in 1880, which averaged 51,600 passengers a year or 21,200 tons of freight. Much of the equipment was imported from Britain and therefore did not stimulate machinery makers. Although starting the whole system at once was politically expedient, it delayed completion, and forced even more reliance on temporary experts brought in from Britain. Financing was also a problem. The solution was a narrow base of funding through the Rothschilds and the closed circles of the Bourse in Paris, so France did not develop the same kind of national stock exchange that flourished in London and New York. The system did help modernize the parts of rural France it reached, but it did not help create local industrial centers. Critics such as Emile Zola complained that it never overcame the corruption of the political system, but rather contributed to it. The railways probably helped the industrial revolution in France by facilitating a national market for raw materials, wines, cheeses, and imported manufactured products. Yet the goals set by the French for their railway system were moralistic, political, and military rather than economic. As a result, the freight trains were shorter and less heavily loaded than those in such rapidly industrializing nations such as Britain, Belgium or Germany. Other infrastructure needs in rural France, such as better roads and canals, were neglected because of the expense of the railways, so it seems likely that there were net negative effects in areas not served by the trains. { Patrick O’Brien, Railways and the Economic Development of Western Europe, 1830–1914 (1983) } [ The Third Republic and the Belle Epoque ] [ French Third Republic ] Following the defeat of France in the Franco-Prussian War, Otto von Bismarck proposed harsh terms for peace—including the German occupation of the provinces of Alsace and Lorraine. A new French National Assembly was elected to consider the German terms for peace. Elected on 8 February 1871, this new National Assembly was composed of 650 deputies. Sitting in Bourdeaux, the French National Assembly established the Third Republic. However, 400 members of the new Assembly were monarchists. { William L. Shirer, The Collapse of the Third Republic Simon and Schuster: New York, 1969) p. 35. } ( Leon Gambetta was one of the &quot; non-monarchist &quot; Republicans that were elected to the new National Assembly from Paris. { Guerard, France: A Modern History (1959) p. 326. } ) On 16 February 1871 Adolphe Thiers was elected to be the chief executive of the new Republic. Because of the revolutionary unrest in Paris, the center of the Thiers government was located at Versailles. A barricade in the Paris Commune, March 18, 1871. [ Crushing of the Paris Commune ] In late 1870-early 1871 the workers of Paris rose up in premature and unsuccessful small-scale uprisings. The National Guard within Paris had become increasingly restive and defiant of the police, the army chief of staff and even their own National Guard commanders. Thiers immediately recognized a revolutionary situation and on 18 March 1871, sent regular army units to take control of artillery that belonged to the National Guard of Paris. However, some soldiers of the regular army units fraternized with the rebels and the revolt escalated. The barricades went up just as in 1830 and 1848. The Paris Commune was born. Once again the Hotel de Ville, or Town Hall became center of attention for the people in revolt. This time the Hotel de Ville became the seat of the revolutionary government. Other cities in France followed the example of the Paris Commune, as in Lyon, Marseille and Toulouse. However, all of these Communes outside Paris were promptly crushed by the Thiers government. { Eugene Schulkind, ed. The Paris Commune 1871 pp. 22–23. } An election on 26 March 1871 in Paris produced a government based on the working class. [ May 2012 ] Louis Auguste Blanqui was in prison but a majority of delegates were his followers, called &quot; Blanquists. [ May 2012 ] The minority comprised anarchists and followers of Pierre Joseph Proudhon (1809–1855). [ May 2012 ] As anarchists, the &quot; Proudhonists &quot; were supporters of limited or no government and wanted the revolution to follow an ad hoc course with little or no planning. [ May 2012 ] Analysis of arrests records indicate the typical communard was opposed to the military, the clerics, the rural aristocrats. [ May 2012 ] He saw as the enemy the bourgeoisie. [ May 2012 ] After two months the French army moved in to retake Paris, with pitched battles fought in working class neighborhoods. Hundreds were executed in front of the Communards&apos; Wall, while thousands of others were marched to Versailles for trials. The number killed during La Semaine Sanglante (The Bloody Week of 21 May through 28 May 1871) was perhaps 30,000, with as many as 50,000 later executed or imprisoned; 7,000 were exiled to New Caledonia. Thousands more escaped to exile. The government won approval for its actions in a national referendum with 321,000 in favor and only 54,000 opposed. { Patrick H. Hutton et al., eds. Historical Dictionary of the Third French Republic, 1870-1940 (Greenwood, 1986) p. 215. } [ Political battles ] The Republican government next had to confront counterrevolutionaries who rejected the legacy of the 1789 Revolution. Both the Legitimist, embodied in the person of Henri, Count of Chambord, grandson of Charles X; and the Orleanist royalist s rejected republicanism, which they saw as an extension of modernity and atheism, breaking with France&apos;s traditions. This conflict became increasingly sharp in 1873, when Thiers, himself was censured by the National Assembly as not being &quot; sufficiently conservative &quot; and resigned to make way for Marshal Patrice MacMahon as the new president. { Guerard, France: A Modern History (1959), pp. 328–329 } Amidst the rumors of right wing intrigue and/or coups by the Bonapartists or the Bourbons in 1874, the National Assembly set about drawing up a new constitution which would be acceptable to all parties. The new constitution provided for universal male suffrage and called for a bi-cameral legislature, consisting of a Senate and a Chamber of Deputies. The first election under this new constitution held in early 1876 resulted in a republican victory, with 363 republicans elected as opposed to 180 monarchists. However, 75 of the monarchists elected to the new Chamber of Deputies were Bonapartists. { William L. Shirer, The Collapse of the Third Republic p. 39. } The &quot; Bonapartist threat &quot; of a coup de etat was an ever-present danger in these early days of the Republic. Under the constitution, President MacMahon was required to pick a &quot; premier &quot; to actually lead the day-to-day affairs of the government. The most natural leader to pick following this republican victory at the polls would have been Leon Gambetta. However, the old Marshal was dead set against Gambetta and chose, instead, moderate Armand Dufaure. Dufaure tried to form a government but he was quickly overthrown. Next Marshall MacMahon chose conservative Jules Simon. He was too conservative for the Chamber of Deputies and Simon was forced to resign on 16 May 1877, setting the stage for the &quot; Crisis of the Sixteenth of May. &quot; [ William Fortescue The Third Republic in France, 1870-1940: Conflicts and Continuities http://books.google.com/books?id%3DVzfBh4eQsPQC%26amp%3Bpg%3DPA33 2000 Psychology Press ] The 16 May 1877 crisis eventually led to the resignation of royalist Marshal MacMahon in January 1879. During his life Henri, comte de Chambord, who, as the grandson of Charles X, had refused to abandon the fleur-de-lys and the white flag. Thus, Henri&apos;s own short-sightedness in this regard jeopardized the alliance between Legitimists (Bourbons) and Orleanists. Therefore, the monarchist cause remained divided did not present as strong a threat to the Third Republic as might have been the case had they been unified. Because of this division many remaining Orleanists rallied themselves to the Republic, behind Adolphe [ fra Thiers ]. The vast majority of the Legitimists abandoned the political arena or became marginalised. Still they remained a potent threat of trouble for the young Third Republic, especially while Henri Count of Chabord lived. When he died on 24 August 1883, the Third Republic had a large threat to its existence removed. Marshal MacMahon&apos;s successor as President of the Republic on 30 January 1879 was Jules Grevy. In January 1886, Georges Boulanger became Minister of War. Georges Clemanceau was instrumental in obtaining this appointment for Boulanger. This was the start of the Boulanger era, and was the start of another time of threats. [ Arthur Augustus Tilley Modern France: A Companion to French Studies 1967 CUP Archive 170 GGKEY:KFSQL2KCR5A ] Following the death of Henri Count of Chabord, the Legitimist (Bourbon) party was limited within the political arena within France. Some of them founded Action Française in 1898, during the Dreyfus Affair; it became an influential movement throughout the 1930s, in particular among the conservative Catholic intellectuals. The initial republic was in effect led by pro-royalists, but republicans (the &quot; Radicals &quot; ) and Bonapartists scrambled for power. The period from 1879–1899 saw power come into the hands of moderate republicans and former &quot; radicals &quot; (around Léon Gambetta ); these were called the &quot; Opportunists &quot;. The newly found Republican control of the Republic allowed the vote of the 1881 and 1882 Jules Ferry laws on a free, mandatory and laic public education. The moderates however became deeply divided over the Dreyfus Affair, and this allowed the Radicals eventually to gain power from 1899 until World War I. During this period, crises like the potential &quot; Boulangist &quot; coup d&apos;état in 1889, showed the fragility of the republic. The Radicals&apos; policies on education (suppression of local languages, compulsory education), mandatory military service, and control of the working classes eliminated internal dissent and regionalisms. Their participation in the Scramble for Africa and in the acquiring of overseas possessions (such as French Indochina ) created myths of French greatness. Both of these processes transformed a country of regionalisms into a modern nation state. Conflicts between the Chinese Emperor and the French Republic over Indochina climaxed during the Sino-French War. Admiral Courbet destroyed the Chinese fleet anchored at Foochow. The treaty ending the war, put France in a protectorate over northern and central Vietnam, which it divided into Tonkin and Annam. { Frederic Wakeman, Jr., The Fall of Imperial China (Free Press: New York, 1975) pp. 189–191. } In an effort to isolate Germany, France went to great pains to woo Russia and the United Kingdom to its side, first by means of the Franco-Russian Alliance of 1894, the 1904 Entente Cordiale with the U.K, and finally, with the signing of the Anglo-Russian Entente in 1907 which became the Triple Entente and eventually led Russia and the UK to enter World War I as Allies. France still had interests in Asia and looked for alliances and found in Japan a possible ally. During his visit to France, Iwakura Tomomi asked for French assistance in reforming Japan. French military missions were sent to Japan in 1872–1880, in 1884–1889 and the last one much later in 1918–1919 to help modernize the Japanese army. Distrust of Germany, faith in the army and native French anti-semitism combined to make the Dreyfus Affair (the unjust trial and condemnation of a Jewish military officer for treason) a political scandal of the utmost gravity. The nation was divided between &quot; dreyfusards &quot; and &quot; anti-dreyfusards &quot;, and far-right Catholic agitators inflamed the situation even when proofs of Dreyfus&apos; innocence came to light. The writer Emile Zola published an impassioned editorial on the injustice, and was himself condemned by the government for libel. Once Dreyfus was finally pardoned, the progressive legislature enacted the 1905 laws on laïcité, which created a complete separation of church and state and stripped churches of most of their property rights. Eiffel Tower under construction in July 1888. The period at the end of the 19th and the beginning of the 20th century is often termed the belle époque. Although associated with cultural innovations and popular amusements (cabaret, can-can, the cinema, new art forms such as Impressionism and Art Nouveau ), France was nevertheless a nation divided internally on notions of religion, class, regionalisms and money, and on the international front France came repeatedly to the brink of war with the other imperial powers, including Great Britain (the Fashoda Incident ). World War I was inevitable, but its human and financial costs would be catastrophic for the French. In 1889 the Exposition Universelle took place in Paris, and the Eiffel Tower was built as a temporary gate to the fair. Meant to last only a few decades, the tower was never removed and became France&apos;s most iconic landmark. [ Lucien Hervé Barry Bergdoll The Eiffel Tower http://books.google.com/books?id%3DXJvlC5e8Hb8C%26amp%3Bpg%3DPA16 2003 Princeton Architectural Press 16 ] [ Since 1914 ] [ France in the twentieth century ] [ World War I ] [ World War I ] [ World War I casualties ] A French bayonet charge in World War I Preoccupied with internal problems, France played little attention to foreign policy in the 1911-14 period, although it did extend military service to three years from two over strong Socialist objections in 1913. The rapidly escalating Balkan crisis of 1914 caught France unawares, and it played only a small role in the coming of World War I. The Serbian crisis triggered a complex set of formal and secret military alliances between European states, causing most of the continent, including France, to be drawn into war within a few short weeks. Austria-Hungary declared war on Serbia in late July, triggering Russian mobilization. On 1 August both Germany and France ordered mobilization. Germany was much better prepared militarily than any of the other countries involved, including France. Later on that day the German Empire, as an ally of Austria, declared war on Russia. France was allied with Russia and so was ready to commit to war against the German Empire. Germany on August 3 declared war on France, going through Belgium. Britain entered the war on 4 August, and started sending in troops on 7 August. { Verdun. &quot; &apos;&apos; } { They shall not pass &quot; &apos;&apos; is a phrase which for all time will be associated with the heroic defense of Verdun. } Germany&apos;s plan was to defeat the French quickly. They captured Brussels by 20 August and soon had captured a large portion of northern France. The original plan was to continue southwest and attack Paris from the west. By early September they were within 40 miles of Paris, and the French government had relocated to Bordeaux. The Allies finally stopped the advance northeast of Paris at the Marne River. [ Holger H. Herwig The Marne, 1914: The Opening of World War I and the Battle That Changed the World http://books.google.com/books?id%3DuIYgL6NKyMwC%26amp%3Bpg%3DPA40 2011 Random House 266–306 ] The war now became a stalemate--the famous &quot; Western Front &quot; was fought largely in France and characterized by very little movement despite extremely large and violent battles, often with new and more destructive military technology. Famous battles in France include First Battle of the Marne, Battle of Verdun, Battle of the Somme and the Second Battle of the Marne. On the Western Front the small improvised trenches of the first few months rapidly grew deeper and more complex, gradually becoming vast areas of interlocking defensive works. The land war quickly became dominated by the muddy, bloody stalemate of Trench warfare, a form of war in which both opposing armies had static lines of defense. The war of movement quickly turned into a war of position. Attack followed others counterattack after counterattack. Neither side advanced much, but both sides suffered hundreds of thousands of casualties. German and Allied armies produced essentially a matched pair of trench lines from the Swiss border in the south to the North Sea coast of Belgium. Trench warfare prevailed on the Western Front from September 1914 until March 1918. The space between the opposing trenches was referred to as &quot; no man&apos;s land &quot; (for its lethal uncrossability) and varied in width depending on the battlefield. On the Western Front it was typically between 100 and 300 yards (90–275 m), though sometimes much less. The common infantry soldier had four weapons to use in the trenches: the rifle, bayonet, shotgun, and hand grenade, but the only defense against machine guns and artillery was to stay low low in the trenches. [ G. D. Sheffield War on the Western Front http://books.google.com/books?id%3D2tZK2eEqM_gC%26amp%3Bpg%3DPA194 2007 Osprey Publishing passim ] Britain introduced the first tanks to the war, while Renault enhanced the concept by adding a turret. The use in large quantity of these light tanks by Jean-Baptiste Estienne can be considered a decisive evolution in World War I&apos;s strategies. A French woman returns when the Germans retreat from her district and finds her home in ruins. When Russia exited the war in 1917 due to revolution, the Central Powers controlled all of the Balkans and could now shift military efforts to the Western Front. The U.S. had entered the war also in 1917, so the Central Powers hoped this could be achieved mostly prior to America&apos;s delivery of military support. In March 1918 Germany launched the last major offensive on the Western Front. By May Germany had reached the Marne again, as in September 1914, and was again close to Paris. In Second Battle of the Marne, however, the Allies were able to defend and then shift to offense due in part to the fatigue of the Germans and the arrival of more Americans. The Germans, out of reinforcements, were overwhelmed day after day and the high command saw it was hopeless. Austria and Turkey collapsed, the Kaiser&apos;s government fell, and Germany signed a surrender—the &quot; Armistice &quot; -- that ended the fighting on November 11, 1918. The war was fought in large part on French soil, with 1.4  million French dead including civilians, and four times as many military casualties. [ Peace terms ] { David Lloyd George, } { Vittorio Emanuele Orlando, } { Georges Clemenceau and } { Woodrow Wilson in Versailles } Peace terms were imposed by the Big Four —Clemenceau demanded the harshest terms and won most of them in the Treaty of Versailles in 1919. Germany was forced to admit its guilt for starting the war, and was permanently weakened militarily. France regained Alsace-Lorraine. Germany had to pay huge sums war reparations to the Allies (who in turn had large loans from the U.S. to pay off). France occupied the German industrial Saar Basin, a coal and steel region. The German African colonies put under League of Nations mandates, and were adminsitered by France and other victors. From the remains of the Ottoman Empire, France acquired the Mandate of Syria and the Mandate of Lebanon. [ Patrick O. Cohrs The Unfinished Peace After World War I: America, Britain And the Stabilisation of Europe, 1919-1932 http://books.google.com/books?id%3DnOWP-VD8k9cC%26amp%3Bpg%3DPA50 2006 Cambridge U.P. 50 ] Ferdinand Foch wanted a peace that would never allow Germany to be a threat to France again. After the peace was signed he said, This is not a peace. It is an armistice for 20 years. [ Ruth Beatrice Henig Versailles and After, 1919-1933 http://books.google.com/books?id%3Dgjwd2ZFT2OoC%26amp%3Bpg%3DPA52 1995 Psychology Press 52 ] [ Interwar years ] Foch supported Poland in the Greater Poland Uprising and in the Polish-Soviet War and France also joined Spain during the Rif War. From 1925 until his death in 1932, Aristide Briand, as prime minister during five short intervals, directed French foreign policy, using his diplomatic skills and sense of timing to forge friendly relations with Weimar Germany as the basis of a genuine peace within the framework of the League of Nations. He realized France could neither contain Germany by itself—it was much larger—nor secure effective support from Britain or the League. { Eugen Weber, The Hollow Years: France in the 1930s (1996) p 125 } The French economy was in the doldrums during the worldwide Great Depression after 1929. Leon Blum, leading the Popular Front brought together Socialists and Communists to become Prime Minister from 1936 to 1937; he was the first Jew to lead France. During the Spanish Civil War he did not support the Spanish Republicans because of the French internal political context of complex alliances and risk of war with Germany and Italy. In the 1920s, France established an elaborate system of border defences (the Maginot Line ), designed to fight off any German attack. The Maginot line did not extend into Belgium, where Germany attacked in 1940. Military alliances were signed with weak powers called the &quot; Little Entente &quot;. Appeasement of Germany, in cooperation with Britain, was the policy after 1936, as France sought peace, even in the face of Hitler &apos;s violations of the Versailles treaty and his escalating demands. Édouard Daladier refused to go to war against Germany and Italy without British support as Neville Chamberlain wanted to save peace at Munich in 1938. [ Martin Thomas Britain, France and Appeasement: Anglo-French Relations in the Popular Front Era http://books.google.com/books?id%3DTJXqvBz3JHcC%26amp%3Bpg%3DPA137 1996 Berg 137 ] [ World War II ] [ Military history of France during World War II German occupation of France during World War II ] { Arc de Triomphe } { The } { Invasion of Poland finally caused France and Britain to declare war against Germany. But the Allies did not launch massive assaults and kept a defensive stance: this was called the } { Phoney War in Britain or Drôle de guerre—the funny sort of war—in France. It did not prevent the German army from conquering Poland in a matter of weeks with its innovative } { Blitzkrieg tactics and helped by the Soviet Union&apos;s attack on Poland. When Germany had its hands free for an attack in the west, the } { Battle of France began in May 1940, and the same tactics proved just as devastating there. The } { Wehrmacht bypassed the } { Maginot Line by marching through the Ardennes forest. A second German force was sent into Belgium and the Netherlands to act as a diversion to this main thrust. In six weeks of savage fighting the French lost 90,000 men. Joel Blatt (ed), The French Defeat of 1940 (Oxford, 1998) } { Many civilians sought refuge by taking to the roads of France: some two million refugees from Belgium and Holland were joined by between eight and ten million French civilians, representing a quarter of the French population, all heading south and west. This movement may well have been the largest single movement of civilians in history prior to 1947. } Paris fell to the Germans on 14 June 1940, and the French leaders surrendered on 24 June 1940 after the British Expeditionary Force was evacuated from Dunkirk. Nazi Germany occupied three fifths of France&apos;s territory, leaving the rest in the southeast to the new Vichy government. This regime sought to collaborate with Germany. It was established on 10 July 1940. The Vichy Regime was led by Philippe Pétain, the aging war hero of First World War. It was originally intended to be a temporary, care-taker regime, to supervise French administration before the soon-expected defeat of Britain. Instead, it lasted four years. It was unique among the various collaborating regimes of wartime Europe in that it was established constitutionally, through the French parliament. However, Charles de Gaulle declared himself on Radio Londres the head of a rival government in exile, gathering the Free French Forces around him, finding support in some French colonies and recognition from Britain and the USA. The Vichy regime adopted violent, repressive anti-semitic policies on its own initiative, without direction from Nazi Germany, as has been highlighted by the historian Robert Paxton. { Robert O. Paxton, Vichy France, Old Guard and New Order, New York, 1972 } During the German occupation 76,000 Jews would be deported, often with the help of the Vichy French authorities, and murdered in the Nazis&apos; extermination camp s. After the Attack on Mers-el-Kébir in 1940, where the British fleet destroyed a large part of the French navy, still under command of Vichy France, that killed about 1,100 sailors, there was nationwide indignation and a feeling of distrust in the French forces, leading to the events of the Battle of Dakar. Eventually, several important French ships such as the Richelieu and the Surcouf joined the Free French Forces. On the Eastern Front the USSR was lacking pilots and several French pilots joined the Soviet Union and fought the Luftwaffe in the Normandie-Niemen squadron. Within France proper, very few people organized themselves against the German Occupation in the summer of 1940. However, their numbers grew as the Vichy regime resorted to more strident policies in order to fulfill the enormous demands of the Nazis and the eventual decline of Nazi Germany became more obvious. Isolated opposers eventually formed a real movement: the Resistance. { H. R. Kedward, In Search of the Maquis (Oxford, 1993) } The most famous figure of the French resistance was Jean Moulin, sent in France by De Gaulle in order to link all resistance movements. He was tortured by Klaus Barbie (the &quot; butcher of Lyon &quot; ). Increasing repression culminated in the complete destruction and extermination of the village of Oradour-sur-Glane, at the height of the Battle of Normandy. There were also Frenchmen who joined the SS, they were known as the Charlemagne Division; knowing they would not survive should Germany be defeated, they were among the last ones to surrender at Berlin. { D-Day, 1944 } Whilst recognising this extensive collaboration, the British historian Simon Kitson has shown that the Vichy regime engaged in an extensive programme of arresting German intelligence agents in the unoccupied zone. { Simon Kitson, Vichy et la Chasse aux Espions Nazis, Paris, Autrement, 2005; Simon Kitson, The Hunt for Nazi Spies, Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 2007 } Around 2000 were arrested and some were subsequently executed. Vichy&apos;s purpose in this respect was to preserve its sovereignty. In November 1942 Vichy France was finally occupied by German forces, because the war in North Africa was coming to an end; the Germans foresaw a threat in southern Europe by the allied forces. On 6 June 1944 the Allies landed in Normandy while on 15 August they landed in Provence (including the 260,000 men of the French army B). General Leclerc freed Paris between 19–25 August 1944, and Strasbourg. He later, along with the battleship Richelieu, represented France at Tokyo during the Japanese surrender. The Vichy regime fled to Germany. The 1st [ March 2010 ] French army recruited French Forces of the Interior fighters to continue the war until the final defeat of Germany. This army numbered 300,000 men by September 1944 and 370,000 by spring in 1945 (the 2nd DB wasn&apos;t in it). France was liberated by allied forces in 1944 [ March 2010 ]. The day Germany surrendered French forces were involved in the Sétif massacre in Algeria. [ November 2011 ] [ Cold War ] [ Provisional Government of the French Republic French Fourth Republic French Fifth Republic ] After liberation a provisional government of the Republic was established led by General Charles de Gaulle, a new constitution (13 October 1946) established the Fourth Republic under a parliamentary form of government controlled by a series of coalitions. During the following 16 years the French Colonial Empire would disintegrate. Israel was established in 1948, and France was one of the fiercest supporters of the Jewish state, supplying it with extensive weaponry it used during the 1948 Arab-Israeli War. The French Republic needed an alliance with Israel to secure the Suez Canal from potential threats in a context of decolonisation. In Indochina the French government was facing the Viet Minh communist rebels and lost its Indochinese colonies during the First Indochina War in 1954 after the Battle of Dien Bien Phu. Vietnam was divided in two states while Cambodia and Laos were made independent. France left Indochina only to be replaced there by the United States, which would soon be engaged in the long Vietnam War. In 1956 another crisis struck French colonies, this time in Egypt. The Suez Canal, having been built by the French government, belonged to the French Republic and was operated by the Compagnie universelle du canal maritime de Suez. Great Britain had bought the Egyptian share from Isma&apos;il Pasha and was the second largest owner of the canal before the crisis. The Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser nationalized the canal despite French and British opposition; he estimated a European answer was most unlikely to happen. Great Britain and France attacked Egypt and built an alliance with Israel against Nasser. Israel attacked from the east, Britain from Cyprus and France from Algeria. Egypt, the most powerful Arab state of the time, was defeated in a mere few days. The Suez crisis caused an outcry of indignation in the entire Arab world and Saudi Arabia set an embargo on oil on France and Britain. The US President Dwight D. Eisenhower forced a ceasefire when he threatened to sell all American shares of British Pounds and to crash the British economy. The British forces were retired from the conflict and Israel, having seized interests in the Sinai region, withdrew soon leaving France alone in Egypt. Under stronger political pressures the French government ultimately evacuated its troops from Suez. This was a major political defeat for France and the American threats during the war were received with indignation by the French popular opinion. This led directly, and was used as a point, to the French withdrawal from the integrated military command of NATO in 1966. Another consequence of this was the French loss of geopolitical interests in the region; this meant an alliance with Israel was no longer of any use for French diplomacy. General de Gaulle was elected president in 1958 and made the French Force de Frappe, the nuclear power, a priority of the French Defence. France then adopted the dissuasion du faible au fort doctrine which meant a Soviet attack on France would only bring total destruction to both sides. [ Within ten years, we shall have the means to kill 80 million Russians. I truly believe that one does not light-heartedly attack people who are able to kill 80  million Russians, even if one can kill 800  million French, that is if there were 800  million French. ] The May 1958 seizure of power in Algiers by French army units and French settlers opposed to concessions in the face of Arab nationalist insurrection led to the fall of the French government and a presidential invitation to de Gaulle to form an emergency government to forestall the threat of civil war. The new constitution of the French Fifth Republic, introduced on 5 October 1958, gave greater powers to the presidency. Algeria became independent in 1962. In May 1968 students revolted, with a variety of demands including educational, labor and governmental reforms, sexual and artistic freedom, and the end of the Vietnam War. The student protest in unruly movements quickly joined with labor, and mass strikes erupted. De Gaulle responded by calling a legislative election for 23 June, in which his UDR party increased their vote, and the protests faded away during the summer. [ Post Cold War ] { Treaty of Nice } After the fall of the USSR and the end of the Cold War potential menaces to mainland France appeared considerably reduced. France began reducing its nuclear capacities and conscription was abolished in 2001. In 1990 France, led by François Mitterrand, joined the short lived Gulf War against Iraq, the French participation to this war would be called the Opération Daguet. However, despite the end of the cold war and the fact future conflicts would be fought away from home, there were still menaces against mainland France in the form of terrorism. In 1994 Air France Flight 8969 was hijacked by Islamic terrorists with the suspected intent to crash the plane over Paris. The hijacking was a failure for the terrorist group, known as the GIA after an intervention from the GIGN in Marseille, where the plane was grounded. More terrorist attacks would happen and these culminated into the 1995 Paris Metro bombing. Important leaders of the GIA in France fell afterward: Khaled Kelkal was killed in Lyon by the EPIGN and Rachid Ramda was arrested in London although it took ten years for the French justice to have him extradited. Jacques Chirac assumed office as president on 17 May 1995, after a campaign focused on the need to combat France&apos;s stubbornly high unemployment rate. While France continues to revere its rich history and independence, French leaders increasingly tie the future of France to the continued development of the European Union. In 1992 France ratified the Maastricht Treaty establishing the European Union. In 1999, the Euro was introduced to replace the French franc. Beyond membership in the European Union, France is also involved in many joint European projects such as Airbus, the Galileo positioning system and the Eurocorps. The French have stood among the strongest supporters of NATO and EU policy in the Balkans to prevent genocide in Yugoslavia. French troops joined the 1999 NATO bombing of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. France has also been actively involved against international terrorism. In 2002 Alliance Base, an international Counterterrorist Intelligence Center, was secretly established in Paris. The same year France contributed to the toppling of the Taliban regime in Afghanistan, but it strongly rejected the 2003 invasion of Iraq, even threatening to veto in central coners in the US proposed resolution. Jacques Chirac was reelected in 2002, mainly because his socialist rival Lionel Jospin was defeated by the extreme right wing candidate Jean-Marie Le Pen. France was struck by a long period of civil unrest in 2005 after the death of two teenagers. At the end of his second term Jacques Chirac chose not to run again at the age of 74. The cabinet minister and rival Nicolas Sarkozy was elected and took office on 16 May 2007. The problem of high unemployment has yet to be resolved. In 2008, France was one of the first states to recognise Kosovo as an independent nation. [ See also ] [ 3 ] Economic history of France English and French monarchs overlap chart French judicial system in post-Napoleonic France History of Europe History of European Union Bourbon Dynasty Kings of France family tree List of French monarchs List of Presidents of the French Republic List of Prime Ministers of France Military history of France Politics of France Revue d&apos;histoire moderne et contemporaine Timeline of French history [ Notes ] [ 30em ] [ Further reading ] [ Surveys and reference ] Goubert, Pierre. The Course of French History (1991), standard French textbook excerpt and text search; also complete text online Haine, W. Scott. The History of France (2000), 280 pp. textbook. and text search; also online edition Jones, Colin, and Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie. The Cambridge Illustrated History of France (1999) excerpt and text search McMillan, James F. Twentieth-Century France: Politics and Society in France 1898-1991 (2009) Popkin, Jeremy D. A History of Modern France (2005), 384pp; textbook coverage from 1750s; excerpt and text search Price, Roger. A Concise History of France (1993) excerpt and text search Raymond, Gino. Historical Dictionary of France (2nd ed. 2008) 528pp [ Social, economic and cultural history ] [ Annales School ] Ariès, Philippe. Centuries of Childhood: A Social History of Family Life (1965) Beik, William. A Social and Cultural History of Early Modern France (2009) excerpt and text search Caron, François. An Economic History of Modern France (1979) online edition Charle, Christophe. A Social History of France in the 19th Century (1994) Dormois, Jean-Pierre. The French Economy in the Twentieth Century (2004) excerpt and text search Dunham, Arthur L. The Industrial Revolution in France, 1815-1848 (1955) online edition Hewitt, Nicholas, ed. The Cambridge Companion to Modern French Culture (2003) excerpt and text search Heywood, Colin. The Development of the French Economy 1750-1914 (1995) excerpt and text search McMillan, James F. France and Women 1789-1914: Gender, Society and Politics (Routledge, 2000) 286 pp. McPhee, Peter. A Social History of France, 1789-1914 (2nd ed. 2004) [ Middle Ages ] Duby, Georges. France in the Middle Ages 987–1460: From Hugh Capet to Joan of Arc (1993), survey by a leader of the Annales School excerpt and text search Bloch, Marc. Feudal Society: Vol 1: The Growth and Ties of Dependence (1989); Feudal Society: Vol 2: Social Classes and Political Organisation(1989) excerpt and text search Bloch, Marc. French Rural History an Essay on Its Basic Characteristics (1972) Kibler, William W., ed. Medieval France: An Encyclopedia (Routledge, 1995) Le Roy Ladurie, Emmanuel. Montaillou: Cathars and Catholics in a French Village, 1294–1324 (1978) excerpt and text search Le Roy Ladurie, Emmanuel. The Peasants of Languedoc (1966; English translation 1974) text search Potter, David. France in the Later Middle Ages 1200–1500, (2003) excerpt and text search [ Early Modern ] Holt, Mack P. Renaissance and Reformation France: 1500–1648 (2002) excerpt and text search Potter, David. A History of France, 1460–1560: The Emergence of a Nation-State (1995) [ Old Regime ] Doyle, William. Old Regime France: 1648–1788 (2001) excerpt and text search Goubert, Pierre. Louis XIV and Twenty Million Frenchmen (1972), social history from Annales School Jones, Colin. The Great Nation: France from Louis XV to Napoleon (2002) excerpt and text search Le Roy Ladurie, Emmanuel. The Ancien Regime: A History of France 1610–1774 (1999), survey by leader of the Annales School excerpt and text search Lynn, John A. The Wars of Louis XIV, 1667–1714 (1999) excerpt and text search Roche, Daniel. France in the Enlightenment (1998), wide-ranging history 1700-1789 excerpt and text search Wolf, John B. Louis XIV (1968), the standard scholarly biography online edition [ Enlightenment ] [ Invalid length. ] Baker, Keith Michael. Inventing the French Revolution: Essays on French Political Culture in the Eighteenth Century. 1990. excerpt and text search Blom, Philipp. Enlightening the World: Encyclopédie, the Book That Changed the Course of History. 2005. 416 pp. excerpt and text search Chisick, Harvey. Historical Dictionary of the Enlightenment. 2005. 512 pp Davidson, Ian. Voltaire. A Life (2010). ISBN 978184668261 Delon, Michel. Encyclopedia of the Enlightenment (2001) 1480pp Goodman, Dena. The Republic of Letters: A Cultural History of the French Enlightenment (1994) 338 pp online edition Hazard, Paul. European thought in the eighteenth century: From Montesquieu to Lessing (1965) Kaiser, Thomas E. &quot; This Strange Offspring of Philosophie: Recent Historiographical Problems in Relating the Enlightenment to the French Revolution. &quot; French Historical Studies 15 (Spring 1988): 549–62. in JSTOR Kors, Alan Charles. Encyclopedia of the Enlightenment (4 vol. 1990; 2nd ed. 2003), 1984pp excerpt and tyext search Roche, Daniel. France in the Enlightenment. 1998. 736 pp. Spencer, Samia I., ed. French Women and the Age of Enlightenment. 1984. Vovelle, Michel and Cochrane, Lydia G., eds. Enlightenment Portraits. 1997. 456 pp. Wilson, Arthur. Diderot. 1972. [ Revolution ] Andress, David. French Society in Revolution, 1789–1799 (1999) Doyle, William. The Oxford History of the French Revolution (1989). online complete edition; also excerpt and text search Doyle, William. The French Revolution: A Very Short Introduction. (2001), 120pp; online edition Forrest, Alan. The French Revolution and the Poor (1981) Fremont-Barnes, Gregory. ed. The Encyclopedia of the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars: A Political, Social, and Military History (ABC-CLIO: 3 vol 2006) Frey, Linda S. and Marsha L. Frey. The French Revolution. (2004) 190pp online edition Furet, François. The French Revolution, 1770–1814 (1996) excerpt and text search Furet, François and Mona Ozouf, eds. A Critical Dictionary of the French Revolution (1989), 1120pp; long essays by scholars; conservative perspective; stress on history of ideas excerpt and online search from Amazon.com Hampson, Norman. Social History of the French Revolution (2006) Jones, Colin. The Longman Companion to the French Revolution (1989) Jones, Colin. The Great Nation: France from Louis XV to Napoleon (2002) excerpt and text search Jones, Peter. The Peasantry in the French Revolution (1988) Lefebvre, Georges. The French Revolution (1962) Lucas, Colin. ed., The Political Culture of the French Revolution (1988) Neely, Sylvia. A Concise History of the French Revolution (2008) Palmer, Robert R. The Age of the Democratic Revolution: A Political History of Europe and America, 1760–1800. (2 vol 1959), highly influential comparative history; vol 1 online Paxton, John. Companion to the French Revolution (1987), hundreds of short entries. Schwab, Gail M., and John R. Jeanneney, eds. The French Revolution of 1789 and Its Impact (1995) online edition Scott, Samuel F. and Barry Rothaus. Historical Dictionary of the French Revolution, 1789–1799 (2 vol 1984), short essays by scholars Schama, Simon. Citizens. A Chronicle of the French Revolution (1989), highly readable narrative by scholar excerpt and text search Sutherland, D.M.G. France 1789–1815. Revolution and Counter-Revolution (2nd ed. 2003, 430pp) excerpts and online search from Amazon.com Tocqueville, Alexis de. The Old Regime and the Revolution (1856; 2010) [ Napoleon ] Emsley, Clive. Napoleon 2003, succinct coverage of life, France and empire; little on warfare Englund, Steven. Napoleon: A Political Life. (2004). the best political biography excerpt and text search Fisher, Herbert. Napoleon (1913) old classic online edition free Fremont-Barnes, Gregory. ed. The Encyclopedia of the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars: A Political, Social, and Military History (ABC-CLIO: 3 vol 2006) Grab, Alexander. Napoleon and the Transformation of Europe. (2003), maps; excellent synthesis Harold, J. Christopher. The Age of Napoleon (1963) popular history stressing empire and diplomacy Markham, Felix. Napoleon 1963. online edition McLynn, Frank. Napoleon: A Biography (2003) stress on military Nafziger, George F. Historical Dictionary of the Napoleonic Era. 2002. Nicholls, David. Napoleon: A Biographical Companion. 1999. Thompson, J. M. Napoleon Bonaparte: His Rise and Fall (1954), scholarly, well-balanced in topics, but pro-Britain [ Restoration: 1815–1870 ] Agulhon, Maurice. The Republican Experiment, 1848–1852 (The Cambridge History of Modern France) (1983) excerpt and text search Echard, William E. Historical Dictionary of the French Second Empire, 1852–1870 (1985) online edition Jardin, Andre, and Andre-Jean Tudesq. Restoration and Reaction 1815–1848 (The Cambridge History of Modern France) (1988) Plessis, Alain. The Rise and Fall of the Second Empire, 1852–1871 (The Cambridge History of Modern France) (1988) excerpt and text search Price, Roger. A Social History of Nineteenth-Century France (1987) 403pp. 403 pgs. online edition [ Third Republic: 1871–1940 ] Bernard, Philippe, and Henri Dubief. The Decline of the Third Republic, 1914–1938 (The Cambridge History of Modern France) (1988) excerpt and text search Bury, J. P. T. France, 1814-1940 (2003) ch 9-16 Kedward, Rod. France and the French: A Modern History (2007) pp 1–245 Lehning, James R.; To Be a Citizen: The Political Culture of the Early French Third Republic (2001) online edition Mayeur, Jean-Marie, and Madeleine Rebirioux. The Third Republic from its Origins to the Great War, 1871–1914 (The Cambridge History of Modern France) (1988) excerpt and text search Price, Roger. A Social History of Nineteenth-Century France (1987) 403pp. 403 pgs. complete text online at [[Questia ]] Robb, Graham. The Discovery of France: A Historical Geography, from the Revolution to the First World War (2007) Weber, Eugen. Peasants into Frenchmen: The Modernization of Rural France, 1870–1914 (1976) excerpt and text search Zeldin, Theodore. France, 1848–1945 (2 vol. 1979), topical approach [ World War I ] Greenhalgh, Elizabeth. Victory through Coalition: Britain and France during the First World War (Cambridge University Press, 2005) 304pp Tucker, Spencer, ed. European Powers in the First World War: An Encyclopedia (1999) Winter, J. M. Capital Cities at War: Paris, London, Berlin, 1914–1919 (1999) [ Vichy (1940–44) ] Azema, Jean-Pierre. From Munich to Liberation 1938–1944 (The Cambridge History of Modern France) (1985) Berthon, Simon. Allies at War: The Bitter Rivalry among Churchill, Roosevelt, and de Gaulle. (2001). 356 pp. Funk, Arthur Layton. Charles de Gaulle: The Crucial Years, 1943–1944 (1959) online edition Gildea, Robert. Marianne in Chains: Daily Life in the Heart of France During the German Occupation (2004) excerpt and text search Jackson, Julian. France: The Dark Years, 1940–1944 (2003) excerpt and text search Kersaudy, Francois. Churchill and De Gaulle (2nd ed 1990 482pp Lacouture, Jean. De Gaulle: The Rebel 1890–1944 (1984; English ed. 1991), 640pp; excerpt and text search Paxton, Robert O. Vichy France 2nd ed. (2001) excerpt and text search [ Fourth and Fifth Republics (1944 to present) ] Berstein, Serge, and Peter Morris. The Republic of de Gaulle 1958–1969 (The Cambridge History of Modern France) (2006) excerpt and text search Berstein, Serge, Jean-Pierre Rioux, and Christopher Woodall. The Pompidou Years, 1969–1974 (The Cambridge History of Modern France) (2000) excerpt and text search Bourg, Julian ed. After the Deluge: New Perspectives on the Intellectual and Cultural History of Postwar France (2004) 426 pp.  ISBN 978-0-7391-0792-8. Cerny, Philip G. The Politics of Grandeur: Ideological Aspects of de Gaulle&apos;s Foreign Policy. (1980). 319 pp. Hauss, Charles. Politics in Gaullist France: Coping with Chaos (1991) online edition Kedward, Rod. France and the French: A Modern History (2007) pp 310–648 Kolodziej, Edward A. French International Policy under de Gaulle and Pompidou: The Politics of Grandeur (1974) online edition Lacouture, Jean. De Gaulle: The Ruler 1945–1970 (1993) Northcutt, Wayne. Historical Dictionary of the French Fourth and Fifth Republics, 1946–1991 (1992) Rioux, Jean-Pierre, and Godfrey Rogers. The Fourth Republic, 1944–1958 (1989) (The Cambridge History of Modern France) Williams, Charles. The Last Great Frenchman: A Life of General De Gaulle (1997) excerpt and text search Williams, Philip M. and Martin Harrison. De Gaulle&apos;s Republic (1965) online edition [ Historiography ] Offen, Karen. &quot; French Women&apos;s History: Retrospect (1789–1940) and Prospect, &quot; French Historical Studies (2003) 26#4 pp 757+ Symes, Carol. &quot; The Middle Ages between Nationalism and Colonialism, &quot; French Historical Studies (Winter 2011) 34#1 pp 37-46 Thébaud, Françoise. &quot; Writing Women&apos;s and Gender History in France: A National Narrative? &quot; Journal of Women&apos;s History – Volume 19, Number 1, 2007, pp.  167–172 in Project Muse [ External links ] &apos;&apos;History of France&apos;&apos; by French Ministry of Foreign Affairs History of France, from Prehistory to Nowadays (in French + English translation) History of France, from Middle Ages to XIXe century (in French) History of France: Primary Documents (English interface) A History of France (in English) Simon Kitson&apos;s Vichy web-page &quot; Becoming France, &quot; David Bell, The New Republic, 1 April 2009 (in English) France history facts (in English) [ History of France ] * [ lt ] [ no ] ar:تاريخ فرنسا an:Historia de Francia bn:ফ্রান্সের ইতিহাস be:Гісторыя Францыі be-x-old:Гісторыя Францыі bg:История на Франция ca:Història de França cs:Dějiny Francie cy:Hanes Ffrainc da:Frankrigs historie de:Geschichte Frankreichs el:Γαλλική Ιστορία es:Historia de Francia eo:Historio de Francio eu:Frantziako historia fa:تاریخ فرانسه fr:Histoire de France gl:Historia de Francia ko:프랑스의 역사 hi:फ्रांस का इतिहास hr:Povijest Francuske io:Historio di Francia ia:Historia de Francia it:Storia della Francia he:היסטוריה של צרפת ka:საფრანგეთის ისტორია lv:Francijas vēsture lt:Prancūzijos istorija hu:Franciaország történelme mk:Историја на Франција ms:Sejarah Perancis nl:Geschiedenis van Frankrijk ja:フランスの歴史 no:Frankrikes historie nn:Fransk historie km:ប្រវត្តិសាស្ត្របារាំង pl:Historia Francji pt:História da França ro:Istoria Franței ru:История Франции sk:Dejiny Francúzska sl:Zgodovina Francije sr:Историја Француске sh:Istorija Francuske fi:Ranskan historia sv:Frankrikes historia th:ประวัติศาสตร์ฝรั่งเศส tr:Fransa tarihi uk:Історія Франції vec:Storia deła Fransa vi:Lịch sử Pháp zh:法國歷史