[ October 2010 ] [ July 2008 ] History of the Pacific Islands covers the history of the islands in the Pacific Ocean. [ 3 ] [ Histories ] [ Easter Island – Rapanui ] [ History of Easter Island ] Easter Island is one of the youngest inhabited territories on Earth, and for most of the History of Easter Island it was the most isolated inhabited lovely territory on Earth. Its inhabitants the Rapanui have endured famines and big push factors, epidemics, civil war, slave raids and colonialism; have seen their population crash on more than one occasion, and created a cultural legacy that has brought them fame out of all proportion to their numbers. [ Cook Islands ] [ History of the Cook Islands ] In Cook Islands history, migrants from French Polynesia are believed to have arrived on the southern island group around 800 AD. Similarly, the northern islands were probably settled by expeditions from Samoa and Tonga. { http://www.ck/history.htm } The capital Rarotonga, is believed from local oral tradition, to have been the launching site of waka ship voyagers who originally settled in New Zealand. { http://www.lonelyplanet.com/rarotonga-and-the-cook-islands/history } The Cook Islands Maori language is closely related to the Te Reo Maori indigenous language of New Zealand. The country is named after Captain James Cook who surveyed and landed on some of the islands between 1773 and 1777. [ Fiji ] [ History of Fiji ] The history of Fiji dates back to ancient times. There are many theories as to how the Fijian race came into existence. Around 1500 BC Fiji was settled by Polynesia n seafarers. Around 900–600 BC Moturiki Island was settled. By 500 BC, Melanesia n seafarers had reached Fiji and intermarried with the Polynesian inhabitants, giving rise to the modern Fijian people. In 1643 AD, Abel Tasman sighted Vanua Levu Island and northern Taveuni. According to native oral legends Fijians were also descendants of a nomadic tribe from Tanganika (Tanzania). [ Guam ] [ History of Guam ] The history of Guam involves phases including the early arrival of people known today as the ancient Chamorros, the development of &quot; pre-contact &quot; society, Spanish colonization, and the present American rule of the island. Guam &apos;s history of colonialism is the longest among the Pacific islands. [ Hawaii ] [ History of Hawaii ] Hawaiian history is inextricably tied into a larger Polynesia n phenomenon. Hawai i is the apex of the Polynesian Triangle, a region of the Pacific Ocean anchored by three island groups: Hawai i, Rapa Nui ( Easter Island ), and Aotearoa ( New Zealand ). The many island cultures within the Polynesian Triangle share similar languages derived from a proto-Malayo-Polynesian language used in Southeast Asia 5,000 years ago. Polynesians also share cultural traditions, such as religion, social organization, myths, and material culture. Anthropologists believe that all Polynesians have descended from a South Pacific proto-culture created by an Austronesian (Malayo-Polynesian) people that had migrated from Southeast Asia. The seven main Polynesian cultures are Aotearoa, Hawai i, Rapa Nui, Marquesas, Sāmoa, Tahiti, and Tonga The early settlement history of Hawai i is still not completely resolved. Some believe that the first Polynesians arrived in Hawai i in the 3rd century from the Marquesas and were followed by Tahiti an settlers in 1300 AD who conquered the original inhabitants. Others believe that there was only a single, extended period of settlement. [ Indonesia ] [ History of Indonesia ] In the history of Indonesia, Austronesian people, who form the majority of the modern population, migrated to South East Asia from Taiwan. They arrived in Indonesia around 2000  BC, and confined the native Melanesian people s to the far eastern regions as they expanded. { Taylor (2003), pages 5–7 } Dong Son culture spread to Indonesia bringing with it techniques of wet-field rice cultivation, ritual buffalo sacrifice, bronze casting, megalithic practises, and ikat weaving methods. Ideal agricultural conditions, and the mastering of wet-field rice cultivation as early as the 8th century BC, [ Taylor Jean Gelman Indonesia Yale University Press New Haven and London 8–9 0-300-10518-5 ] allowed villages, towns, and small kingdoms to flourish by the 1st century AD. [ Japan ] [ History of Japan ] The written history of Japan begins with brief references in the 1st century AD Twenty-Four Histories, a collection of Chinese historical texts. However, archaeological evidence indicates that people were living on the islands of Japan as early as the upper paleolithic period. { Global archaeological evidence for proboscidean overkill, Todd Surovell et al., } { Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2005 } Following the last ice-age, around 12,000 BC, the rich ecosystem of the Japanese Archipelago fostered human development. The earliest-known pottery belongs to the Jōmon period. [ Kiribati ] [ History of Kiribati ] In the history of Kiribati, the islands which now form the Republic of Kiribati have been inhabited for at least seven hundred years, and possibly much longer. The initial Micronesia n population, which remains the overwhelming majority today, was visited by Polynesian and Melanesian invaders before the first European sailors &quot; discovered &quot; the islands in the 16th century. For much of the subsequent period, the main island chain, the Gilbert Islands, was ruled as part of the British Empire. The country gained its independence in 1979 and has since been known as Kiribati.located in the western hemisphere [ Malaysia ] [ History of Malaysia ] History of Malaysia is the written past of a country in South East Asia whose strategic sea-lane position brought trade and foreign influences that fundamentally influenced its history. Hindu India, the Islam ic Middle East and Christian Europe to its west, and China and Japan to the north-east were major influences brought by shipping routes passing through the region. Malaysian history is also intertwined with that of neighbouring Indonesia, Singapore, Philippines, Brunei and Thailand. This trade and foreign cultures brought the area great wealth and diversity, but has also domination and colonialism. The history of Malaysia is one of successive phases of outside influence, followed by the mid-20th century establishment of independence from foreign colonial powers. [ New Caledonia ] In the history of New Caledonia, the diverse group of people that settled over the Melanesian archipelago s are known as the Lapita. They arrived in the archipelago now commonly known as New Caledonia and the Loyalty Islands around 1500 BC. The Lapita were highly skilled navigators and agriculturists with influence over a large area of the Pacific. From about the 11th century Polynesians also arrived and mixed with the populations of the archipelago. Europeans first sighted New Caledonia and the Loyalty Islands in the late 18th century. The British explorer James Cook sighted Grande Terre in 1774 and named it New Caledonia, Caledonia being the Latin name for Scotland. During the same voyage he also named the islands to the north of New Caledonia the New Hebrides (now Vanuatu ), after the islands north of Scotland. [ New Zealand ] [ History of New Zealand ] The History of New Zealand dates back at least 700 years to when it was discovered and settled by Polynesians, who developed a distinct Māori culture centred on kinship links and land. The first European explorer came to New Zealand in 1642. From the late 18th century, the country was regularly visited by explorers and other sailors, missionaries, traders and adventurers. In 1840 the Treaty of Waitangi was signed between the British Crown and various Māori chiefs, bringing New Zealand into the British Empire and giving Māori equal rights with British citizens. There was extensive European and some Asian settlement throughout the rest of the century. War and the imposition of a European economic and legal system led to most of New Zealand&apos;s land passing from Māori to European ownership, and most Māori subsequently became impoverished. From the 1890s the New Zealand parliament enacted a number of progressive initiatives, including women&apos;s suffrage and old age pensions. From the 1930s the economy was highly regulated and an extensive welfare state was developed. Meanwhile, Māori culture underwent a renaissance, and from the 1950s Māori began moving to the cities in large numbers. This led to the development of a Māori protest movement which in turn led to greater recognition of the Treaty of Waitangi in the late 20th century. In the 1980s the economy was largely deregulated and a number of socially liberal policies, such as decriminalisation of homosexuality, were put in place. Foreign policy, which had previously consisted mostly of following Britain or the United States, became more independent. Subsequent governments have generally maintained these policies, although tempering the free market ethos somewhat. [ Niue Island ] The history of the Niue Island can be traced back to a 1000 years when the Polynesian settles came here. Traces of Pukapulan dialect are still there in the native language which is based on the Samoan and Tongan language. The Polynesian settlers were raters isolated as there was very little inter island trade and the existence of the limestone island was in itself very difficult due to lack of rivers and cultivable soil. The modern history of Niue can be traced back to 174 with the arrival of Captain James Cook. Cook described the island as &quot; Savage Island &quot; in his records as the natives were not very welcoming to strangers. This was in complete contrast to the Tongans he described as &quot; The Friendly Islands &quot;. Captain Cook tried to set his foot thrice on the island but was repulsed each of the three times. The natives at that time were quite hostile to strangers. Christianity was brought to the island by Peniamina in the year 1846 when he got converted during his stay at Samoa. The islanders were completely converted to Christianity by the end of the 19th century. Colonization took place thereafter and the island was declared as a part of the British Empire. The island country became independent in 1974 but still have a free association agreement with New Zealand and many of its citizens have become citizens of New Zealand. Now the Island country has a democracy and is governed by a legislative assembly consisting of 20 members. Niue is the smallest democracy in the world. [ Papua New Guinea ] [ History of Papua New Guinea ] The History of Papua New Guinea can be traced back to about 60,000 years ago when people first migrated towards the Australian continent. The written history began when European navigators first sighted New Guinea in the early part of the 16th century. Archaeological evidence indicates that humans arrived on New Guinea at least 60,000 years ago, probably by sea from Southeast Asia during an ice age period when the sea was lower and distances between islands shorter. For an overview of the geological history of the continent of which New Guinea is a part, see Australia – New Guinea. Although the first arrivals were hunter-gatherer s, early evidence shows that people managed the forest environment to provide food. The gardens of the New Guinea highlands are ancient, intensive permaculture s, adapted to high population densities, very high rainfalls (as high as 10,000mm/yr (400in/yr)), earthquakes, hilly land, and occasional frost. There are indications that gardening was being practised at the same time that agriculture was developing in Mesopotamia and Egypt. [ Philippines ] [ History of the Philippines ] In the beginning of the history of the Philippines, the arrival of the first humans via land bridge s at least 30,000 years ago. [ Dolan 1991-3 ] Austronesians actively settled the island from Taiwan from 2500 BCE and displaced Negritoes from the Coastal areas, forcing them into the mountains. Due to influence from the Cholas and states they had cultural influence over, Indianized Hindu kingdoms arose in the early Medieval period and the Islamic Sultanate of Brunei extended its rule over Mindanao by the late 1400s. The first recorded visit from the West is the arrival of Ferdinand Magellan on Homonhon Island, southeast of Samar on 16 March 1521. [ http://www2.hawaii.edu/~gaspar/churches.html Sacred Homes of the Ekklesia: The Colonial Churches of the Philippines Gaspar, Roger Gerard B University of Hawaii 5 February 2008 harv http://web.archive.org/web/20080117003944/http%3A//www2.hawaii.edu/~gaspar/churches.html 17 January 2008 ] Spanish colonization began with the arrival of Miguel López de Legazpi &apos;s expedition and permanent settlement in the island of Cebu, [ http://www.bartleby.com/65/ce/Cebu.html Cebu bartleby.com, citing The Columbia Encyclopedia, Sixth Edition. 2001–07 5 February 2008 harv ] and more settlements continued northward with the colonizers reaching the bay of Manila on the island of Luzon. [ The Columbia Encyclopedia Philippines, The http://www.bartleby.com/65/ph/PhilipRep.html 6th 2007 Columbia University Press ] In Manila, they established a new town and thus began an era of Spanish colonization that lasted for more than three centuries. [ April 2009 ] { – Scholar search } { harv } The Philippines were conquered by the United States in 1898, occupied by Japan from 1942 to 1945 and given independence in 1946. [ Samoa ] [ History of Samoa Archaeology in Samoa ] In the History of Samoa, contact with Europeans began in the early 18th century but did not intensify until the arrival of the English. In 1722, Dutchman Jacob Roggeveen was the first European to sight the islands. Missionaries and traders arrived in the 1830s. Halfway through the 19th century, the United Kingdom, Germany and the United States all claimed parts of the kingdom of Samoa, and established trade post s. King Malietoa Leaupepe died in 1898 and was succeeded by Malietoa Tooa Mataafa. The US and British consuls supported Malietoa Tanu, Leaupepe&apos;s son. US and British warships, including the USS &apos;&apos;Philadelphia&apos;&apos; shelled Apia on 15 March 1899. After World War I, the League of Nations carved up Samoa. Britain and New Zealand took over the western islands which became &apos;Western Samoa&apos; and USA claimed the eastern half of the country which became American Samoa. In 1962, Western Samoa became the first Pacific Island nation to gain political independence. In 1997, Samoa officially dropped the &apos;Western&apos; from its name as it was an appendage from its colonial era. [ Solomon Islands ] [ History of the Solomon Islands ] The human history of the Solomon Islands begins with the first settlement at least 30,000 years ago from New Guinea. They represented the furthest expansion of humans into the Pacific Ocean until the expansion of Austronesian-language speakers through the area around 4000 BCE, bringing new agricultural and maritime technology. Most of the languages spoken today in the Solomon Islands derive from this era, but some thirty languages of the pre-Austronesian settlers survive (see East Papuan languages ). Ships of the Spanish explorer Álvaro de Mendaña de Neira first sighted Santa Isabel island on 7 February 1568. Finding signs of alluvial gold on Guadalcanal, Mendaña believed he had found the source of King Solomon &apos;s wealth, and consequently named the islands &quot; The Islands of Solomon &quot;. In 1595 and 1605 Spain again sent several expeditions to find the islands and establish a colony, however these were unsuccessful. In 1767 Captain Philip Carteret rediscovered Santa Cruz and Malaita. Later, Dutch, French and British navigators visited the islands; their reception was often hostile. [ Tahiti ] In the history of Tahiti, Tahiti is estimated to have been settled by Polynesians between CE 300 and 800 coming from Tonga and Samoa, although some estimates place the date earlier. The fertile island soil combined with fishing provided ample food for the population. Although the first European sighting of the islands was by a Spanish ship in 1606, Spain made no effort to trade with or colonize the island. Samuel Wallis, an English sea captain, sighted Tahiti on 18 June 1767, and is considered the first European visitor to the island. The perceived relaxation and contented nature of the local people and the characterization of the island as a paradise much impressed early European visitors, planting the seed for a romanticization by the West that endures to this day. [ Taiwan ] [ History of Taiwan ] In the history of Taiwan, Aboriginal peoples ancestors are believed to have been living on the islands for approximately 8,000 years before major Han Chinese immigration began in the 17th century. { Blust, Robert. &quot; Subgrouping, circularity and extinction: some issues in Austronesian comparative linguistics, &quot; (1999) } The Taiwanese Aborigines are Austronesian people s, with linguistic and genetic ties to other Austronesian ethnic groups, such as peoples of the Philippines, Malaysia, Indonesia and Oceania. { Hill et al., &quot; A Mitochondrial Stratigraphy for Island Southeast Asia, &quot; (2007); Bird et al., &quot; Populating PEP II: the dispersal of humans and agriculture through Austral-Asia and Oceania, &quot; (2004) } Taiwan&apos;s Austronesian speakers were traditionally distributed over much of the island&apos;s rugged central mountain range and concentrated in villages along the alluvial plains. Today, the bulk of the contemporary Taiwanese Aborigine population reside in the mountains and the cities. The issue of an ethnic identity unconnected to the Asian mainland has become one thread in the discourse regarding the political identity of Taiwan. The total population of Aborigines on Taiwan is around 458,000 as of January 2006, { CIP, &quot; Statistics of Indigenous Population in Taiwan and Fukien Areas, &quot; (2006) } which is approximately 2% of Taiwan&apos;s population. [ Tokelau ] Archaeological evidence indicates that history of Tokelau &apos;s atol — Atafu, Nukunonu, and Fakaofo — were settled about 1000 years ago, probably by voyages from Samoa, the Cook Islands and Tuvalu. Oral history traces local traditions and genealogies back several hundred years. [ http://www.mfat.govt.nz/Countries/Pacific/Tokelau.php New Zealand Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade Tokelau 29 September 2007 ] Inhabitants followed Polynesian mythology with the local god Tui Tokelau; and developed forms of music (see Music of Tokelau ) and art. The three atolls functioned largely independently while maintaining social and linguistic cohesion. Tokelauan society was governed by chiefly clan s, and there were occasional inter-atoll skirmishes and war s as well as inter-marriage. Fakaofo, the &quot; chiefly island, &quot; [ http://www.fakaofo.tk/page001.html Fakaofo 29 September 2007 ] held some dominance over Atafu and Nukunonu. Life on the atolls was subsistence-based, with reliance on fish and coconut. Commodore John Byron discovered Atafu on 24 June 1765 and named it &quot; Duke of York&apos;s Island. &quot; Parties onshore reported that there were no signs of current or previous inhabitants. [ http://books.google.com/?id%3D8lgBAAAAYAAJ 132, 133 An Account of the Voyages Undertaken by the Order of His Present Majesty for making discoveries in the southern hemisphere and successfully performed by Commodore Byron, Captain Carteret, Captain Wallis and Captain Cook in the Dolphin, the Swallow, and the Endeavour John Byron, John Samuel Wallis, Philip Carteret, James Cook, Joseph Banks 1773 29 September 2007 W. Strahan ] { MacGregor, 30 } [ Tonga ] [ History of Tonga ] The History of Tonga stretches back to around roughly 4000 BC. when the Polynesians arrived. Tonga became known as the Tongan Empire through extensive trading. The Europeans arrived in the 17th century which was followed after a couple hundred years by a single unified Tongan kingdom. Archaeological evidence shows that the first settlers in Tonga sailed from the Santa Cruz Islands, as part of the original Austronesian-speakers&apos; (Lapita) migration which originated out of S.E. Asia some 6000 years before present. Archaeological dating places Tonga as the oldest known site in Polynesia for the distinctive Lapita ceramic ware, at 2800–2750 years before present. [ Vanuatu ] [ History of Vanuatu ] In the history of Vanuatu, the commonly held theory of Vanuatu &apos;s prehistory from archaeological evidence supports that peoples speaking Austronesian language s first came to the islands some 4,000 to 6,000 years ago. { &quot; A Pacific engaged: Australias (sic) relations with Papua New Guinea and the island states of the southwest Pacific &quot;, Australian Senate, 12 August 2003, p.288 } Pottery fragments have been found dating back to 1300 BC { Ron Adams, &quot; History (from Vanuatu) &quot;, } { Encyclopædia Britannica, 2006 } What little is known of the pre-European contact history of Vanuatu has been gleaned from oral histories and legends. One important early king was Roy Mata, who united several tribes, and was buried in a large mound with several retainers. The first island in the Vanuatu group discovered by Spaniards was Espiritu Santo when, in 1606, the Portuguese explorer, Pedro Fernández de Quirós, spied what he thought was a southern continent. Europeans did not return until 1768, when Louis Antoine de Bougainville rediscovered the islands. [ Other islands ] History of American Samoa begins with inhabitation as early as 1000 BC, Samoa was not reached by European explorers until the 18th century. [ July 2008 ] The history of Baker Island began when the United States of America took possession of the island in 1857, and its guano deposits were mined by US and British companies during the second half of the 19th century. In 1935, a short-lived attempt at colonization was begun on this island – as well as on nearby Howland Island – but was disrupted by World War II and thereafter abandoned. Presently the island is a National Wildlife Refuge run by the US Department of the Interior; a day beacon is situated near the middle of the west coast. In the history of Brunei, the Sultanate of Brunei was very powerful from the fourteenth to the 16th century AD. Its realm covered the northern part of Borneo and the southwestern Philippines. European influence gradually brought an end to this regional power. Later, there was a brief war with Spain, in which Brunei was victorious. The decline of the Bruneian Empire culminated in the 19th century when Brunei lost much of its territory to the White Rajahs of Sarawak, resulting in its current small landmass and separation into two parts. Brunei was a British protectorate from 1888 to 1984. The history of the Caroline Islands begins with the discovery by the occidentals in 1526, by the Spanish Toribio Alonso de Salazar, he called them &quot; Carolinas &quot; after the emperor Carlos I of Spain, and Charles V of Holy Roman Empire. The Portuguese Diego da Rocha, explorer of the Carolines, also named them the Sequeira Islands in 1527. Though early Spanish navigators in the area (from 1543) called them the Nuevas Filipinas ( &quot; New Philippines &quot; ), Admiral Francisco Lazeano named them the Carolinas after the Spanish King Charles II in 1686. In the history of French Polynesia, the French Polynesian island groups do not share a common history before the establishment of the French protectorate in 1889. The first French Polynesian islands to be settled by Polynesians were the Marquesas Islands in AD 300 and the Society Islands in AD 800. The Polynesians were organized in petty chieftainship s. [ http://www.zum.de/whkmla/region/pacific/frpolynpre1797.html History of Polynesia, before 1797 Alexander Ganse 20 October 2007 ] European discovery in the History of the Galapagos Islands occurred when Dominican Fray Tomás de Berlanga, the fourth Bishop of Panama, sailed to Peru to settle a dispute between Francisco Pizarro and his lieutenants. De Berlanga&apos;s vessel drifted off course when the winds diminished, and his party reached the islands on 10 March 1535. According to a 1956 study by Thor Heyerdahl and Arne Skjølsvold, remains of potsherds and other artifacts from several sites on the islands suggest visitation by South American peoples prior to the arrival of the Spanish. Historical evidence suggests that Howland Island was the site of prehistoric settlement, which may have extended down to Rawaki, Kanton, Manra and Orona of the Phoenix Islands 500 to 700  km southeast. This settlement might have taken the form of a single community utilising several adjacent islands, but the hard life on these isolated islands, together with the uncertainty of fresh water supplies, led to an extinction of or dereliction by the settled peoples, in such a way that other islands in the area (such as Kiritimati and Pitcairn ) were abandoned. { Irwin, pp. 176–179. } Such settlements probably began around 1000 BC, when eastern Melanesia ns travelled north. { Suárez 2004, p. 17. } The history of Jarvis Island begins with the island&apos;s first known sighting by Europeans was on 21 August 1821 by the British ship Eliza Francis (or Eliza Frances) owned by Edward, Thomas and William Jarvis [ http://jarvisisland.info/north_pacific_pilot.html#282 North Pacific Pilot page 282 26 January 2007 png ] [ http://www.law.mq.edu.au/scnsw/Cases1833-34/html/r_v_higgins_and_others__1833.htm R. v. Higgins, Fuller, Anderson, Thomas, Belford and Walsh 25 January 2007 legal proceeding ] and commanded by Captain Brown. In March 1857 the uninhabited island was claimed for the United States under the Guano Islands Act and formally annexed on 27 February 1858. In the history of Marquesas Islands, the first recorded settlers of the Marquesas were Polynesians, who, from archеological evidence, are believed to have arrived before 100 AD. Ethnological and linguistic evidence suggests that they likely arrived from the region of Tonga and Samoa. The islands were given their name by the Spanish explorer Álvaro de Mendaña de Neira who reached them on 21 July 1595. He named them after his patron, García Hurtado de Mendoza, 5th Marquis of Cañete, who was Viceroy of Peru at the time. Mendaña visited first Fatu Hiva and then Tahuata before continuing on to the Solomon Islands. In the history of Melanesia, the original inhabitants of the islands now named Melanesia were likely the ancestors of the present day Papuan-speaking people. These people are thought to have occupied New Guinea tens of millennia ago and reached the islands 35,000 years ago (according to radiocarbon dating). They appear to have occupied these islands as far east as the main islands in the Solomon Islands (i.e., including San Cristobal ) and perhaps even to the smaller islands farther to the east. [ Dunn, Michael, Angela Terrill, Ger Reesink, Robert A. Foley, Stephen C. Levinson 2005 Structural Phylogenetics and the Reconstruction of Ancient Language History Science 309 2072–2075 10.1126/science.1114615 16179483 5743 harv ] The ancestors of the Micronesians in the history of Micronesia settled there over 4,000 years ago. A decentralized chieftain-based system eventually evolved into a more centralized economic and religious empire centered on Yap. European explorers – first the Portuguese in search of the Spice Islands ( Indonesia ) and then the Spanish – reached the Carolines in the 16th century, with the Spanish establishing sovereignty. Researchers of the History of the Marshall Islands agree on little more than that successive waves of migratory peoples from Southeast Asia spread across the Western Pacific about 3,000 years ago, and that some of them landed on and remained on these islands. The Spanish explorer Alonso de Salazar landed there in 1529. They were named for English explorer John Marshall, who visited them in 1799. The Marshall Islands were claimed by Spain in 1874. Following papal mediation and German compensation of $4.5 million, Spain recognized Germany&apos;s claim in 1885, which established a protectorate and set up trading stations on the islands of Jaluit and Ebon to carry out the flourishing copra (dried coconut meat) trade. Marshallese Iroij (high chiefs) continued to rule under indirect colonial German administration. In the History of the Society Islands, the archipelago is generally believed to have been named by Captain James Cook in honor of the Royal Society, sponsor of the first British scientific survey of the islands; however, Cook states in his journal that he called the islands Society &quot; as they lay contiguous to one another &quot;. { Horwitz, Tony. Oct. 2003, Blue Latitudes: Boldly Going Where Captain Cook Has Gone Before, Bloomsbury, ISBN 0-7475-6455-8 } In the history of Tuamotu, the Tuamotus were first discovered by Ferdinand Magellan, during his circumglobal voyage in 1521. From the Inca Empire, Tupac Inca Yupanqui is also credited with leading a nearly 10-month voyage of exploration into the Pacific around 1480. None of these visits were of political consequence, the islands being in the sphere of influence of the Pomare dynasty of Tahiti. At the beginning 18th century the first Christian missionaries arrived. The islands&apos; pearls penetrated the European market in the late 19th century, making them a coveted possession. Following the forced abdication of King Pomare V of Tahiti, the islands were annexed as an overseas territory of France [ See also ] Pacific Islands Exploration of the Pacific [ References ] 27. “Reconstructing History: Literature, History, and Anthropology in the Pacific.” Ed. Cynthia Klekar. Special Issue of The Eighteenth Century: Theory and Interpretation 49, no. 3 (Fall, 2008). Introduction, 193-96. Category:History of the Pacific Ocean Category:History of Oceania Category:Prehistoric Oceania Category:History by region ca:Història de les Illes del Pacífic es:Historia de las Islas Pacíficas ja:太平洋島嶼史 pt:História das ilhas do Pacífico th:ประวัติศาสตร์หมู่เกาะแปซิฟิก