Gershom ben Judah, (c. 960 -1040? -1028?) best known as Rabbeinu Gershom ( Hebrew : רבנו גרשום, &quot; Our teacher Gershom &quot; ) and also commonly known to scholars of Judaism by the title Rabbeinu Gershom Me&apos;Or Hagolah ( &quot; Our teacher Gershom the light of the exile &quot; ), was a famous Talmud ist and Halakhist. Rashi of Troyes (d. 1105) said less than a century after Gershom&apos;s death, { Responsa 70 } &quot; all members of the Ashkenazi diaspora are students of his. &quot; As early as the 14th century Asher ben Jehiel wrote { Responsa 43:8 } that Rabbeinu Gershom&apos;s writings were &quot; such permanent fixtures that they may well have been handed down on Mount Sinai. &quot; He is most famous for the synod he called around 1000 CE, in which he instituted various laws and bans. [ Biography ] Born in Metz in 960, Gershom was a student of Judah ben Meir ha-Kohen (Sir Léontin), who was one of the greatest authorities of his time. { As he himself says in a } { responsum reported by R. } { Meir of Rothenburg, he owed most of his knowledge to his teacher, } { Judah ben Meir ha-Kohen (Sir Léontin), who was one of the greatest authorities of his time. } Having lost his first wife, Gershom married a widow named Bonna and settled at Mainz ( Mayence ), where he devoted himself to teaching the Talmud. During his lifetime Mainz became a center of Torah and Jew ish scholarship for many Jewish communities in Europe that had formerly been connected with the Babylonian yeshiva s. He was the spiritual guide of the fledgling Ashkenazi c Jewish communities and was very influential in molding them at a time when their population was dwindling. Students came from all over Europe to enroll in his yeshiva, and later dispersed among various communities in Germany and beyond which helped spread Jewish learning. He had many pupils from different countries, among whom should be mentioned Eleazar ben Isaac (ha-Gadol = &quot; the Great &quot; ), nephew of Simeon ha-Gadol; and Jacob ben Yakar, teacher of Rashi. The fame of his learning eclipsed even that of the heads of the academies of Sura (city) and Pumbedita. His life conformed to his teachings. He had a son, who forsook his religion at the time of the expulsion of the Jews from Mainz in 1012. When his son converted to become a Christian R. Gershom grieved and observed the strictures of mourning for 14 days, double the required time for an actual death. However, he did apparently rule leniently regarding those who had submitted to baptism to escape persecution, and who afterward returned to the Jewish fold. He strictly prohibited reproaching them with infidelity, and even gave those among them who had been slandered an opportunity to publicly pronounce the benediction in the synagogue s. [ Teachings ] Questions of religious casuistry were addressed to him from all countries, and measures which he authorized had legal force among all the Jews of Europe. About 1000 CE he called a synod which decided the following particulars: (1) prohibition of polygamy; (2) necessity of obtaining the consent of both parties to a divorce; (3) modification of the rules concerning those who became apostate s under compulsion; (4) prohibition against opening correspondence addressed to another. [ Works ] Gershom&apos;s literary activity was not less fruitful. He is celebrated for his works in the field of Biblical exegesis, the Masorah, and lexicography. He revised the text of the Mishnah and Talmud, [ May 2008 ] and wrote commentaries on several treatises of the latter which were very popular and gave an impulse to the production of other works of the kind. His selichot were inspired by the bloody persecutions of his time. Gershom also left a large number of rabbinical responsa, which are scattered throughout various collections. He is the author of Seliha 42 - Zechor Berit Avraham ( &quot; Remember the Covenant of Abraham &quot; ), a liturgical poem recited by Ashkenazic Jews during the season of Rosh HaShana and Yom Kippur. The Holy City and its regions are turned to shame and to spoils and all its desirable things are buried and hidden and nothing is left except this Torah. [ Synod and bans ] He is famous for his religious ban s within Judaism, which include: The prohibition of polygamy (until the end of fifth millennium (1240 CE) according to some opinions; others find no mention of this in the early sources and therefore hold it is still in force); The prohibition of divorcing a woman against her will; The modification of the rules concerning those who became apostates under compulsion; The prohibition of reading private mail. Shevet HaKehusi 1:315:1, quoted in Lebovits, Rabbi Moishe Dovid, &quot; Reading Another Person&apos;s Mail &quot;, Hamodia Features, 6 January 2010, p. C3. His bans are considered binding on all of Ashkenazic Jewry until the present day, although the reasons for this are controversial. Some authorities hold that the bans are still binding, while others consider them to have expired but nonetheless obligatory to follow as universally accepted customs. [ See also ] Heter meah rabbanim [ References ] [ Bibliography ] Allgemeine Deutsche Biographie, vol. ix., Leipzig, 1879 Chaim Azulai, Shem ha-Gedolim Bloch and Lévy, Histoire de la Littérature Juive, p.  310 Histoire littéraire de la France, xiii. 2 et seq. Heinrich Grätz, Gesch. v. 405-407 Leopold Zunz, Literaturgesch. pp.  238–239 Eliakim Carmoly, La France Israélite, pp.  13–21 Henri Gross, Gallia Judaica, pp.  299 et seq. With regard to the so-called Ordinances of Rabbi Gershom see especially Rosenthal, in Jubelschrift zum Siebzigsten Geburtstag des Dr. Israel Hildesheimer. Berlin, 1890; pp.  37 et seq. [ External links ] Schechter, Solomon and Bloch, Isaac Gershom ben Judah at the 1906 Jewish Encyclopedia site. Biographical page Rashi by Maurice Liber Biography of Rashi who carried Rabbenu Gershom&apos;s teachings into the medieval world. Discusses influence. [ 102479267 nr/92/5231 34317013 viaf/34317013 52083125 2 VIAF numbers ] [ Gershom Ben Judah 960 ] Category:960 births Category:11th-century deaths Category:Rishonim Category:10th-century rabbis Category:11th-century rabbis Category:People from Metz de:Gerschom ben Jehuda fr:Guershom ben Yehouda he:רבנו גרשום pl:Gerszom z Moguncji pt:Guershom ben Juda ru:Гершом Меор ха-гола sh:Geršom ben Jehuda sv:Gerschom ben Jehuda yi:רבינו גרשום