[ September 2008 ] { garden railway layout. } LGB is the standard acronym for Lehmann Gross Bahn - the &quot; Lehmann Big Railway &quot; in German. Made by Ernst Paul Lehmann Patentwerk in Nuremberg, Germany, since 1968 [ Souter, Gerry; Souter, Janet Modern toy trains 2002 MBI St. Paul, Minn. 978-0-7603-1179-0 35 ] and by Märklin since 2007, it is the most popular garden railway model in Europe, although there are also many models of U.S. and Canadian prototypes. [ Johnson, Kent R. Garden railroading: getting started in the hobby 2002 Kalmbach Books Waukesha, WI 978-0-89024-369-5 5 ] LGB caused a revival of garden model railroading in the United States when it was introduced. LGB is sold in North America through Walthers, who took over from Ernst Paul Lehmann&apos;s subsidiary, LGB of America, when Märklin bought the LGB assets. Most of the European prototypes were manufactured in Germany, while much of the North American rolling stock was made in China. LGB trains are responsible for introducing &quot; G &quot; scale to model railroading. The scale ratio used by LGB is 1:22.5, [ Johnson, Kent R. Basic Model Railroading: Getting Started in the Hobby (Model Railroader Books) Kalmbach Publishing Company 978-0-89024-334-3 7 ] although other G-scale (and Gauge 1 ) manufacturers produce products that range from 1:20 to 1:32, [ A. Grams, John Toy train collecting and operating: an introduction to the hobby 1999 Kalmbach Books Waukesha, WI 978-0-89778-447-4 ] and for the most part, all use the same track and are compatible with one another. Though they can all run on the same track (45  mm gauge ), models representing narrow-gauge versions of trains or locomotives would not normally be run together with models of larger full-scale vehicles. To fit the same standard track the latter must be built using different scales. To illustrate the point, 1:22.5 scale passengers and/or train crew are somewhat oversized when displayed in close proximity with 1:32 models. Though the models may be physically compatible, many people choose a style or era to fit their desires and pick one ratio (in the range of 1:20.3 to 1:32) to model all of their trains. One of the most prominent aspects of LGB trains over other model railroad models is their durability. All locomotives, track, and accessories of the main product line function in rain and snow allowing nearly anyone to have an outdoor garden railroad. As a matter of fact, there have been cases when LGB products have survived against all odds. Apparently, an LGB controller was once caught in a flood in early spring; not only was it completely submerged, but the water actually froze solid around it the next day when the temperature dropped. After the controller thawed out, it was taken inside and set next to a heater to dry. Against all odds, the product apparently worked fine, as if nothing had happened. The first loco made under the LGB brand was a model of a small Austrian 0-4-0 named &quot; Stainz. &quot; This loco appears in the LGB logo and is still in production today, although it now has a sound system and other mechanical differences to the original 1968 model. Most garden railway enthusiasts have at least one example of a Stainz in their collection as it tends to be a robust loco with good pulling power. LGB&apos;s tooling is of great interest due to its design. For example, on the standard 4-wheel coach they have a choice four roof designs and three body designs, all using the same chassis and end walkway mouldings. Such careful planning allows common parts to be used keeping costs down. Two very different-looking vehicles can share all but one or two components. LGB&apos;s engineering is also of similar interest. Starter sets typically include a circle of track with a 4 foot diameter and a smaller two-axle locomotive, like the Stainz mentioned above. [ Bankruptcy, purchase, and resumption of production ] The German company Ernst Paul Lehmann filed for bankruptcy in late 2006, only a few short months after LGB of America (LGBoA) was spun off into its own company. LGBoA was one of the companies that bid on the purchase of Lehmann&apos;s remaining assets, but lost to Märklin, another German model train manufacturer. Shipping and production resumed in fall 2007, with the LGB brand intact. On September 21, 2007, an interim agreement concerning already-manufactured product was signed between LGBoA and Märklin that gave LGBoA exclusive distribution and service rights in North America. However, a new contract was never signed. Since LGBoA owned the LGB trademark in the United States, new LGB products could not be distributed there without some sort of agreement between LGBoA and Märklin. Meanwhile, Märklin had been distributing new products to the rest of the world. On June 1, 2008, Silvergate Distributors, Inc. was formed as a new company by LGB of America president Anthony Castellano. Silvergate is an independent, American-owned, hobby distributor and is not a subsidiary or &quot; daughter firm &quot; of any other company. Though LGBoA was not dissolved, Silvergate assumed distribution of remaining LGB stock as well as current and new product lines. Silvergate appears to be diversifying as it has now acquired distribution of the Schuco line and is expanding with Brawa and Piko as its current model railroad product lines. In November 2008, Märklin announced that it had resolved the American trademark dispute and planned to resume distribution of LGB products in the United States starting tentatively in January 2009, as well as update the LGB websites and release a 2008/2009 catalog. Märklin announced that distribution to the North American market will be through Walthers. This arrangement has not been greatly affected by Märklin&apos;s early 2009 insolvency. As of April 2009, a select few LGB products can be ordered at the Walthers website, with more arriving soon. [ In popular culture ] The Comedy Inc. sketch, &quot; Ernest the Engine and Others &quot;, uses L.G.B models, buildings, and track. In the 1999 movie Stuart Little Stuart explores George&apos;s indoor city-themed model railway world. A Santa Fe F7 and a F7B with a matching caboose goes around the track and Stuart appears before the train hits him on a piece of track. in The Santa Clause two LGB passenger trains are featured in the beginning of the film and later a LGB Mogul holiday cargo freight train circles around the room during the part when Scott and Charlie went to the North Pole. [ References ] [ External links ] [ LGB_(Lehmann_Gross_Bahn) LGB (trains) ] [ 49.41409 11.15717 inline ] LGB website Märklin website A forum devoted to LGB trains A blog devoted to LGB All the latest news about LGB Links related to LGB Old factory location (Saganer Strasse 1-5, D-90475 Nuremberg, Germany ) Category:Model railroad manufacturers Category:Companies based in Nuremberg de:Lehmann-Groß-Bahn fr:Lehmann Gross Bahn nl:LGB ja:レーマン ru:Lehmann-Gross-Bahn sv:Lehmanns Gross Bahn