Les Six is a name, inspired by Mily Balakirev &apos;s The Five, given in 1920 by critic Henri Collet in an article titled &quot; [ fr Les cinq Russes, les six Français et M. Satie ] &quot; (Comoedia, 16 January 1920) to a group of six composers working in Montparnasse. Their music is often seen as a reaction against the musical style of Richard Wagner and the impressionist music of Claude Debussy and Maurice Ravel. [ Members ] Formally, the Groupe des Six members were: Groupe des Six members Name Born Died Georges Auric 1899 1983 Louis Durey 1888 1979 Arthur Honegger 1892 1955 Darius Milhaud 1892 1974 Francis Poulenc 1899 1963 Germaine Tailleferre 1892 1983 [ Les nouveaux jeunes ] In 1917, when many theatres and concert halls were closed because of World War I, Blaise Cendrars and the painter Moise Kisling decided to put on concerts at 6 Rue Huyghens, the studio of the painter Émile Lejeune. For the first of these events, the walls of the studio were decorated with canvases by Picasso, Matisse, Léger, Modigliani and others. Music by Erik Satie, Honegger, Auric and Durey was played. It was this concert that gave Satie the idea of assembling a group of composers [ March 2012 ] around himself to be known as Les nouveaux jeunes, forerunners of Les Six. [ Les Six ] According to Milhaud: [ [Collet] chose six names absolutely arbitrarily, those of Auric, Durey, Honegger, Poulenc, Tailleferre and me simply because we knew each other and we were pals and appeared on the same musical programmes, no matter if our temperaments and personalities weren&apos;t at all the same! Auric and Poulenc followed ideas of Cocteau, Honegger followed German Romanticism, and myself, Mediterranean lyricism! Ivry 1996 ] But that is only one reading of how the Groupe des Six originated: other authors, like Ornella Volta, would stress the manoeuvrings of Jean Cocteau to become the leader of an avant-garde group devoted to music, like the cubist and surrealist groups had sprung in visual arts and literature shortly before, with Pablo Picasso, Guillaume Apollinaire and André Breton as their key representatives. The fact that Satie had abandoned the Nouveaux jeunes less than a year after starting the group, was the &quot; gift from heaven &quot; that made it all come true for Cocteau: his 1918 publication Le coq et l&apos;Arlequin is said to have ticked it off. After World War I, Jean Cocteau and Les Six began to frequent a bar known as &quot; La gaya &quot; which became Le Bœuf sur le Toit (The Ox on the Roof) when the establishment moved to larger quarters and as the famous ballet by Milhaud had been conceived at the old premises, the new bar took on the name of Milhaud&apos;s ballet. { Roger Stéphane, &quot; Portrait souvenir de Jean Cocteau &quot; (transcript of a French television interview in 1963 by the author and the subject), pp 63-67 Tallandier 1964 ISBN 2-235-01889-0 } On the renamed bar&apos;s opening night, pianist Jean Wiéner played tunes by George Gershwin and Vincent Youmans while Cocteau and Milhaud played percussion. Among those in attendance were Russian impresario Serge Diaghilev, Pablo Picasso, filmmaker René Clair, singer Jane Bathori, and Maurice Chevalier. The Group was officially launched in January 1920 by a series of two articles by the French music critic and composer Henri Collet in the French journal Commedia. While it seems apparent that Cocteau was behind these articles, the actual name of the Group was selected by Collet, who decided to compare Les Six with the Five Russians. The group published an album of piano pieces together, known as Album des Six. This was the only single work in which all six composers collaborated. Five of the members jointly composed the music for Cocteau&apos;s ballet Les mariés de la tour Eiffel, which was produced by the Ballets suédois, the rival to the Ballet Russes. Cocteau had originally proposed the project to Auric, but as Auric did not finish rapidly enough to fit into the rehearsal schedule, he then divided the work up among the other members of Les Six. Durey, who was not in Paris at the time, chose not to participate. The première was the occasion of a public scandal which rivaled that of Le sacre du printemps only years before. In spite of this, Les mariés de la tour Eiffel was in the repertoire of the Ballets suédois throughout the 1920s. Les mariés de la tour Eiffel did not mark &quot; the end of the Groupe des Six &quot;, as Durey was present for every concert and other manifestations that marked the anniversaries of the founding of the group. Les Six did not ever cease to exist, they simply took their own individual paths that they had announced from the beginning. In 1927, Auric, Milhaud and Poulenc, along with seven other composers who were not part of Les Six, jointly composed the children&apos;s ballet L&apos;éventail de Jeanne. In 1952, Auric, Honegger, Poulenc, Tailleferre and three other composers collaborated on La guirlande de Campra. { Cocteau, Satie &amp; Les Six } [ Music by Les Six ] [ Music written jointly by more than one member of Les Six ] Album des Six (published 1920); solo piano music collection by the six composers and the only musical project in which they all participated Prélude (1919) - Auric Romance sans paroles, Op. 21 (1917) - Durey Sarabande, H 26 (1920) - Honegger Mazurka (1914) - Milhaud Valse en ut, FP 17 (1919) - Poulenc Pastorale (1919) - Tailleferre Les mariés de la tour Eiffel was a 1921 joint project by Auric, Honegger, Milhaud, Poulenc and Tailleferre, on a scenario by Cocteau Overture (14 July) - Auric Marche nuptiale - Milhaud Discours du General (Polka) – Poulenc La Baigneuse de Trouville – Poulenc La Fugue du Massacre – Milhaud La Valse des Depeches – Tailleferre Marche funèbre – Honegger Quadrille – Tailleferre Ritournelles – Auric Sortie de la Noce – Milhaud L&apos;éventail de Jeanne was a 1927 ballet written collaboratively by 10 composers, three of whom (Auric, Milhaud and Poulenc) were members of Les Six Fanfare - Maurice Ravel Marche - Pierre-Octave Ferroud Valse - Jacques Ibert Canarie - Alexis Roland-Manuel Bourrée - Marcel Delannoy Sarabande - Albert Roussel Polka - Milhaud Pastourelle - Poulenc Rondeau - Auric Finale: Kermesse-Valse - Florent Schmitt Contributing composers included Auric, Milhaud and Poulenc, along with Jean Françaix, Léo Preger and Henri Sauguet. La guirlande de Campra was a set of orchestral variations composed jointly in 1952 by Auric, Honegger, Poulenc, Tailleferre and three other composers. Toccata - Honegger Sarabande et farandole - Jean-Yves Daniel-Lesur Canarie - Alexis Roland-Manuel Sarabande - Tailleferre Matelote provençale - Poulenc Variation - Henri Sauguet Écossaise - Auric. Auric and Poulenc were the only members of Les Six to participate in all five of these collaborative projects. [ Selected music by individual members of Les Six ] Salade by Milhaud; premiered 1924 in a production of Count Etienne de Beaumont La nouvelle Cythère by Tailleferre; written in 1929 for the Ballets Russes and unproduced because of Diaghilev &apos;s sudden death Cinq bagatelles by Auric Sonate pour violoncelle et piano by Poulenc (see also :Category:Compositions by Francis Poulenc ) Flute Sonata, Op. 164 (1956-7) by Poulenc Scaramouche by Milhaud Le bœuf sur le toit by Milhaud Sonate pour violon seul by Honegger Danse de la chèvre (Dance of the Goat) for solo flute by Honegger Sonate champêtre for Oboe, Clarinet, Bassoon and Piano by Tailleferre [ See also ] Grupo de los Ocho [ References ] [ Sources ] Benjamin Ivry (1996). Francis Poulenc. Phaidon Press Limited. ISBN 0-7148-3503-X. Fondation Erik Satie, Le groupe des Six et ses amis: 70e anniversaire - Placard, Paris 1990 - 40 p. - ISBN 2-907523-01-5 Ornella Volta, Satie/Cocteau - les malentendus d&apos;une entente: avec des lettres et des textes inédits d&apos;Erik Satie, Jean Cocteau, Valentine Hugo et Guillaume Apollinaire - Castor Astral - 1993 - ISBN 2-85920-208-0 Cocteau, Jean - Le coq et l&apos;Arelquin: Notes Autour de la Musique - Avec un portrait de l&apos;auteur et deux monogrammes par P. Picasso - Paris, Éditions de la Sirène - 1918 Roger Nichols - The Harlequin Years: Music in Paris 1917-1929 - 2002 - ISBN 0-500-51095-4 [ Further reading ] Shapiro, Robert (2011). Les Six: The French Composers and their Mentors Jean Cocteau and Erik Satie. Peter Owen Publishers, London/Chicago. ISBN 978-0-7206-1293-6 [ External links ] &apos;&apos;Les Six&apos;&apos;, Satie, and Cocteau - by Stéphane Villemin Category:French composers Category:Articles about multiple people Six Category:French musical groups ca:Grup dels Sis cs:Pařížská šestka da:Les Six de:Groupe des Six es:Les Six fr:Groupe des Six (musique) ko:프랑스 6인조 it:Gruppo dei Sei he:קבוצת השישה la:Les Six nl:Groupe des Six ja:フランス6人組 no:Les Six pcd:Groupe des Six pl:Les Six pt:Les Six ru:Шестёрка (группа композиторов) simple:Les Six fi:Les Six sv:Les Six uk:Французька шістка zh:六人团