[ January 2009 ] The politics of India ( Hindi :भारतीय राजनीति) takes place within the framework of a federal Westminster-style Parliamentary democratic constitutional republic, in which the President of India is head of state and the Prime Minister of India is the head of government. Executive power is exercised by the President and is independent of the legislature. Legislative power is vested in both the government and the two chambers of the Parliament of India, the Lok Sabha and the Rajya Sabha. Federal and state elections generally take place within a multi-party system, although this is not enshrined in law. The judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature, the highest national court being the Supreme Court of India. India is the world&apos;s largest democracy in terms of citizenry. { Pranab Mukherjee played a central role in the implementation of the } { Indo-US civilian nuclear agreement. } India is a nation that is characterized as a &quot; sovereign socialist secular democratic republic &quot;. Like the United States, India has had a federal form of government since it adopted its constitution. However, the central government in India has greater power in relation to its states, and its central government is patterned after the British parliamentary system. The national government has the power to dismiss state governments under specific constitutional clauses or in case no majority party or coalition is able to form a government. The central government can also impose direct federal rule known as president&apos;s rule (or central rule). Locally, the Panchayati Raj system has several administrative functions. For most of the years since independence, the federal government has been guided by the Indian National Congress (INC). [ #FF8C00 #FFFFFF Country Profile: India http://lcweb2.loc.gov/frd/cs/profiles/India.pdf 2007-06-24 Library of Congress - Federal Research Division December 2004 PDF ] The two largest political parties have been the INC and the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP). Although the two parties have dominated Indian politics, regional parties also exist. From 1950 to 1990, barring two brief periods, the INC enjoyed a parliamentary majority. The INC was out of power between 1977 and 1980, when the Janata Party won the election due to public discontent with the corruption (promulgation of Emergency with stringent forces) of Prime Minister Indira Gandhi. In 1989, a Janata Dal -led National Front coalition, in alliance with the Left Front coalition, won the elections but managed to stay in power for only two years. [ Bhambhri Chandra Prakash Politics in India 1991–92 Shipra Publications 1992 978-81-85402-17-8 118, 143 ] As the 1991 elections gave no political party a majority, the INC formed a minority government under Prime Minister P.V. Narasimha Rao and was able to complete its five-year term. [ http://www.hindu.com/2004/12/24/stories/2004122408870100.htm Narasimha Rao passes away The Hindu 2008-11-02 Chennai, India 24 December 2004 ] The years 1996–1998 were a period of turmoil in the federal government with several short-lived alliances holding sway. The BJP formed a government briefly in 1996, followed by the United Front coalition that excluded both the BJP and the INC. In 1998, the BJP formed the National Democratic Alliance (NDA) with several other parties and became the first non-Congress government to complete a full five-year term. [ http://www.lse.ac.uk/collections/government/PSPE/pdf/PSPE_WP5_07.pdf The effective space of party competition Patrick Dunleavy, Rekha Diwakar, Christopher Dunleavy London School of Economics and Political Science 2007-10-01 PDF ] In the 2004 elections, the INC won the largest number of Lok Sabha seats and formed a government with a coalition called the United Progressive Alliance (UPA), supported by various parties. [ Hermann Kulke Dietmar Rothermund A History of India Routledge 2004 978-0-415-32919-4 384 ] In the 2009 Lok Sabha elections, the INC more than 200 seats, a majority. Indian democracy has been suspended once. { A special report on India: The democracy tax is rising: Indian politics is becoming ever more labyrinthine 11 December 2008 } { The Economist } Nevertheless, Indian politics is often described as chaotic. More than a fifth of parliament members face criminal charges. [ Central and State Governments ] The central government exercises its broad administrative powers in the name of the President, whose duties are largely ceremonial. The president and vice president are elected indirectly for 5-year terms by a special electoral college. The vice president assumes the office of president in case of the death or resignation of the incumbent president. The constitution designates the governance of India under two branches, namely: the executive branch and the legislative branch. Real national executive power is centered in the Council of Ministers, led by the Prime Minister of India. The President appoints the Prime Minister, who is designated by legislators of the political party or coalition commanding a parliamentary majority. The President then appoints subordinate ministers on the advice of the Prime Minister. In reality, the President has no discretion on the question of whom to appoint as Prime Minister except when no political party or coalition of parties gains a majority in the Lok Sabha. Once the Prime Minister has been appointed, the President has no discretion on any other matter whatsoever, including the appointment of ministers. But all Central Government decisions are nominally taken in his/her name. [ Legislative branch ] The constitution designates the Parliament of India as the legislative branch to oversee the operation of the government. India&apos;s bicameral parliament consists of the Rajya Sabha (Council of States) and the Lok Sabha (House of the People or Council of Ministers)..... [ State Government ] States in India have their own elected governments, whereas Union Territories are governed by an administrator appointed by the president. Some of the state legislatures are bicameral, patterned after the two houses of the national parliament. The states&apos; chief ministers are responsible to the legislatures in the same way the prime minister is responsible to parliament. Each state has a presidentially appointed governor who may assume certain broad powers when directed by the central government. The central government exerts greater control over the union territories than over the States, although some territories have gained more power to administer their own affairs. Local state governments in India have less autonomy compared to their counterparts in the United States, Africa and Australia., [ Judicial branch ] India&apos;s independent judicial system began under the British, and its concepts and procedures resemble those of Common Law countries. The constitution designates the Supreme Court, the High Courts and the lower courts as the authority to resolve disputes among the people as well as the disputes related to the people and the government. The constitution through its articles relating to the judicial system provides a way to question the laws of the government, if the common man finds the laws as unsuitable for any community in India. [ Political parties and elections ] [ List of political parties in India Elections in India ] [ Indian general election, 2009 ] [ Local governance ] [ Panchayati Raj ] On April 24, 1993, the Constitutional (73rd Amendment) Act, 1992 came into force to provide constitutional status to the Panchayati Raj institutions. This Act was extended to Panchayats in the tribal areas of eight States, namely Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa and Rajasthan from 24 December 1996. The Act aims to provide 3-tier system of Panchayati Raj for all States having population of over 2 million, to hold Panchayat elections regularly every 5 years, to provide reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Women, to appoint State Finance Commission to make recommendations as regards the financial powers of the Panchayats and to constitute District Planning Committee to prepare draft development plan for the district. [ Role of political parties ] [ List of political parties in India Elections in India ] As any other democracy, political parties represent different sections among the Indian society and regions, and their core values play a major role in the politics of India. Both the executive branch and the legislative branch of the government are run by the representatives of the political parties who have been elected through the elections. Through the electoral process, the people of India choose which majority in the lower house, a government can be formed by that party or the coalition. Indian state governments led by various political parties as of March 2009. India has a multi-party system, where there are a number of national as well as regional parties. A regional party may gain a majority and rule a particular state. If a party represents more than 4 states then such parties are considered as national parties. In the 64 years since India&apos;s independence, India has been ruled by the Indian National Congress (INC) for 51 of those years. The party enjoyed a parliamentary majority barring two brief periods during the 1970s and late 1980s. This rule was interrupted between 1977 to 1980, when the Janata Party coalition won the election owing to public discontent with the controversial state of emergency declared by the then Prime Minister Indira Gandhi. The Janata Dal won elections in 1989, but its government managed to hold on to power for only two years. Between 1996 and 1998, there was a period of political flux with the government being formed first by the right-wing nationalist Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) followed by a left-leaning United Front coalition. In 1998, the BJP formed the National Democratic Alliance with smaller regional parties, and became the first non-INC and coalition government to complete a full five-year term. The 2004 Indian elections saw the INC winning the largest number of seats to form a government leading the United Progressive Alliance, and supported by left-parties and those opposed to the BJP. On 22 May 2004, Manmohan Singh was appointed the Prime Minister of India following the victory of the INC &amp; the left front in the 2004 Lok Sabha election. The UPA now rules India without the support of the left front. Previously, Atal Bihari Vajpayee had taken office in October 1999 after a general election in which a BJP-led coalition of 13 parties called the National Democratic Alliance emerged with a majority. Formation of coalition governments reflects the transition in Indian politics away from the national parties toward smaller, more narrowly based regional parties. Some regional parties, especially in South India, are deeply aligned to the ideologies of the region unlike the national parties and thus the relationship between the central government and the state government in various states has not always been free of rancor. Disparity between the ideologies of the political parties ruling the centre and the state leads to severely skewed allocation of resources between the states. [ Political issues ] [ Socio-economic issues in India ] [ Corruption in India ] [ Social issues ] The lack of homogeneity in the Indian population causes division between different sections of the people based on religion, region, language, caste and race. This has led to the rise of political parties with agendas catering to one or a mix of these groups. Some parties openly profess their focus on a particular group; for example, the Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam &apos;s and the All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam &apos;s focus on the Dravidian population, and the Shiv Sena &apos;s pro- Marathi agenda. Some other parties claim to be universal in nature, but tend to draw support from particular sections of the population. For example, the Rashtriya Janata Dal (translated as National People&apos;s Party) has a vote bank among the Yadav and Muslim population of Bihar and the All India Trinamool Congress does not have any significant support outside West Bengal. The Bharatiya Janata Party, the party with the second largest number of MPs in the 15th Lok Sabha, has an image of being pro- Hindu. Such support from particular sections of the population affects the agenda and policies of such parties, and call into question their claims of being universal representatives. The Congress may be viewed as the most secular party with a national agenda; however, it also practices votebank politics to gain the support of minorities, especially Muslims, through appeasement and pseudo-secularist strategies. Many political parties are involved in caste-, religion- or language-based politics, which effects India&apos;s growth and progress. The narrow focus and votebank politics of most parties, even in the central government and central legislature, sidelines national issues such as economic welfare and national security. Moreover, internal security is also threatened as incidences of political parties instigating and leading violence between two opposing groups of people is a frequent occurrence. [ Economic issues ] Economic issues like poverty, unemployment, development are main issues that influence politics. Garibi hatao (eradicate poverty) has been a slogan of the Indian National Congress for a long time. The well known Bharatiya Janata Party encourages a free market economy. The Communist Party of India (Marxist) vehemently supports left-wing politics like land-for-all, right to work and strongly opposes neo-liberal policies such as globalization, capitalism and privatization. As a noteworthy case, the manifesto of the Samajwadi Party, the third largest party in the 15th Lok Sabha, for the 2009 general elections promised to reduce the use of computers upon being elected. [ Law and order ] Terrorism, Naxalism, religious violence and caste-related violence are important issues that affect the political environment of the Indian nation. Stringent anti-terror legislation such as TADA, POTA and MCOCA have received much political attention, both in favour and opposed. Law and order issues such as action against organized crime are not issues that affect the outcomes of elections. On the other hand, there is a criminal–politician nexus. Many elected legislators have criminal cases against them. In July 2008, the Washington Times reported that nearly a fourth of the 540 Indian Parliament members faced criminal charges, &quot; including human trafficking, immigration rackets, embezzlement, rape and even murder &quot;. [ http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2008/07/23/AR2008072303390.html With Indian Politics, the Bad Gets Worse The Washington Times Emily Wax 24 July 2008 22 May 2010 ] [ See also ] Government of India Law of India Indian political scandals [ References ] [ 2 ] [ Further reading ] Chowdhuri, Satyabrata Rai. &apos;&apos;Leftism in India, 1917-1947&apos;&apos;. Palgrave, U.K., 2007. Shively, W. Phillips. Power and Choice: An Introduction to Political Science—Chapter 14 Example: Parliamentary Government in India. McGraw Hill Higher Education, 2008. ISBN 978-0-07-340391-5 Mitra, Subrata K. and Singh, V.B.. Democracy and Social Change in India: A Cross-Sectional Analysis of the National Electorate. New Delhi: Sage Publications, 1999. ISBN 81-7036-809-X (India HB) ISBN 0-7619-9344-4 (U.S. HB). Tawa Lama-Rewal, Stéphanie. &apos;&apos; &quot; Studying Elections in India: Scientific and Political Debates &quot; &apos;&apos;. &apos;&apos;South Asia Multidisciplinary Academic Journal, 3, 2009. [ External links ] [ Politics of India ] Official Indian National Congress Web Site Official Bharatiya Janata Party Web Site [ Politics of ] * ar:سياسة الهند bn:ভারতের রাজনীতি bg:Държавно устройство на Индия de:Politisches System Indiens dv:އިންޑިޔާގެ ސިޔާސީ މައިދާން es:Política de la India eo:Politiko de Barato fr:Politique de l&apos;Inde hi:भारत की राजनीति it:Sistema politico dell&apos;India he:פוליטיקה של הודו pl:Ustrój polityczny Indii pt:Política da Índia ru:Государственный строй Индии sa:भारतस्य शासनप्रणालिः sv:Indiens politik ta:இந்திய அரசியல் zh:印度政治