[ NHK World NHK World logo.gif April 1995 (as NHK Asia TV) April 1, 1998 (as NHK World TV) December 6, 2009 (current format) NHK Your Eye on Asia Japan English worldwide except Japan 1080i ( HDTV ) http://www.nhk.or.jp/nhkworld District of Columbia ( MHz Networks ) Channel 30.2 Los Angeles ( KSCI ) Channel 18.2 Philadelphia ( WYBE ) Channel 35.2 Astro Malaysia Channel 398 Indovision Indonesia Channel 354 TrueVisions Thailand Channel 76 G Sat Philippines Channel 32 SKY México Mexico Channel 283 (Mexico) Directv LatinAmerica Channel 782 (Pay Per View) GVT Brazil Channel 140 Sky UK and Ireland Channel 507 (HD) Freesat UK Channel 209 (HD) Optus D2 Australia and New Zealand( GlobeCast ) 12546 V 22500 3/4 DD Direct+ India Channel 42 Astra Europe Channel 574 (Spain, Digital + ) Intelsat 10 3739 MHz H Intelsat 9 4040 MHz H Intelsat 8 4060 MHz H DishHD Channel 130 Sky Brasil Channel 114 Cignal Digital TV ( Philippines ) Channel 66 SkyCable Philippines Channel 78 Parasat Cable TV Philippines Channel 109 StarHub TV Singapore Channel 147 &amp; 148 TrueVisions Thailand Channel 76 First Media Indonesia Channel 257 Global Destiny Cable Philippines Channel 72 &amp; 73 Time Warner Cable Hawaii, USA Channel 682 &amp; 1682 (HD) Skylife Korea Channel 97 (HD) Minneapolis Public Schools Minneapolis, MN Channel 78 Onlime Russia Channel 96 In Onlime Cable TV Hong Kong Channel 154 Now TV Hong Kong Channel 710 Live Webcast Official ] NHK World is the international broadcasting service of NHK (Nippon Hōsō Kyōkai - Japan Broadcasting Corporation), Japan&apos;s public broadcaster. The service is aimed at the overseas market, similar to BBC World News, Press TV, DW-TV, France 24 and Russia Today, and broadcast through satellite and cable operators throughout the world. NHK World provides three services: NHK World Radio Japan, NHK World TV, and NHK World Premium. NHK World also makes most of its programming available through an online version of the television channel. [ Television Japan ] [ NHK World Television ] NHK Asia TV started broadcasting in 1995 as a service for Japanese expatriates in Asia. On April 1, 1998, NHK Asia TV was re-branded as NHK World Television to reflect its status as a global broadcaster following its expansion outside Asia. NHK&apos;s news and information channel broadcasts internationally via satellite and cable TV. Programming is broadcast in English. It began as a news channel in February 2009 using the traditional NHK World logo in their own digital on-screen graphic (DOG). Previously, NHK World TV used the traditional &quot; 3 Eggs &quot; logo of NHK. The NHK World DOG in the news program, Newsline, is on the bottom left corner of the television screen. In other programming, the DOG is moved to the top left corner of the television screen. Some of the shows are produced by production studio JIB TV which is 60% owned by NHK with the remaining 40% owned by private investors like Microsoft and Japanese bank Mizuho. The NHK World DOG is not used at all when shows produced by JIB TV are aired. [ NHK World Premium ] NHK World Premium Television broadcasts a mixture of news, sports and entertainment in Japanese worldwide via satellite as a subscription service. In Europe this service is broadcast under the name JSTV and in the USA it is known as TV Japan. The programmes generally don&apos;t carry English subtitles. [ Programmes ] Current programmes on the channel are: { Programmes } Asia 7 Days - hosted by Susumu Shimokawa; a program wraps up major issues of Asia, in relation to the news occurred in that week. Asia Biz Forecast - hosted by Yuko Fukushima; it using an extensive network of reporters and correspondents from across the region, this fast-paced, magazine-style program presents the latest in Asia business news and trends. At Home with Venetia in Kyoto Cool Japan Itadakimasu! Dining with the Chef J-Melo Kawaii International Mapping Kyoto Streets NHK Newsline Somewhere Street Today&apos;s Close Up Tokyo Eye - hosted by Chris Peppler; introduces many fascinating aspects of contemporary Tokyo from the perspectives of both visitors and those who live in this diverse metropolis. Tokyo Fashion Express - hosted by Aki Shibuya; presents up-to-the-minute reports on Tokyo&apos;s cutting-edge fashions as well as news on fashion trends around the world, including Paris, Milan, and Asian countries, such as rapidly growing India and China. Tomorrow beyond 3.11 - a documentary series presents perspectives on the March 2011 disaster and recovery from filmmakers, musicians, thinkers, athletes, singers and actors from around the world who travelled to the region to support the well-being of survivors. [ Radio Japan ] NHK World Radio Japan (RJ) broadcasts news, information, and entertainment programs focusing on Japan and Asia, for a daily total of 65 hours of broadcasts.Radio Japan provides two services: General Service broadcasts worldwide in Japanese and English Regional Service broadcasts to specific geographical zones in 17 languages: English, Arabic, Bengali, Burmese, Chinese, French, Hindi, Indonesian, Korean, Persian, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, Swahili, Thai, Urdu, and Vietnamese Both services are available on shortwave (SW) as well as online. [ RJ SW Relay Stations ] RJ runs a domestic SW relay station Yamata RJ also leases or owns several external relay stations United Kingdom - BBC Ascension Island - BBC relay station Gabon UAE Sri Lanka Singapore - BBC relay station Canada - Radio Canada International Bonaire Island - Radio Netherlands French Guiana - Radio France Internationale [ Radio Japan historical output (1950–1996) ] For a comparison of Radio Japan to other broadcasters see the following: [ Internet service ] NHK World programs and contents are available online: NHK World - Online news and live HQ stream of NHK World TV Radio Japan. live streams, [[podcast ]s and archive programming] Japanese Lessons - Re-edited versions of Basic Japanese for You and Brush Up Your Japanese. Please note that only a limited number of programs are available online for free. [ See also ] NHK International broadcasting in Japan J-Melo NHK Newsline, new English language newscast on NHK World TV Int&apos;l After School [ References ] [ External links ] NHK World NHK World Premium Category:24-hour television news channels World Category:External services (broadcasting) Category:Foreign television channels broadcasting in the United Kingdom Category:English-language television stations Category:Cable TV of Hong Kong Category:Television channels and stations established in 1995 ar:إن إتش كي وورلد es:NHK World fa:ان‌اچ‌کی جهان fr:NHK World ko:NHK 월드 nl:NHK World ja:NHKワールド tl:NHK World tr:NHK World vi:NHK World zh:NHK World