[ May 2012 ] [ January 2011 ] [ 1677 10 20 y ] { Lwów, Poland } [ 1766 2 23 1677 10 20 ] { Lunéville, France } { Notre-Dame de Bon-Secours, } { Nancy, France; } { Wawel, } { Kraków, Poland } Coat of Arms of Stanislaus Leszczynski as lifelong King of Poland, Duke of Lorraine and Barrois Stanisław I Leszczyński ( [ staˈniswaf lɛʂˈtʂɨɲski ] ) ( [ Stanislovas Leščinskis ]; [ Stanisław Leszczyński ]; [ Станіслаў Ляшчынскі ] ) (October 20, 1677 – February 23, 1766) was King of the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth, Duke of Lorraine and a count of the Holy Roman Empire (a rank bestowed by Emperor Frederick III on the Leszczyński family). Born in Lviv in 1677, he was the son of Rafał Leszczyński, voivode of Poznań Voivodeship, and Anna Katarzyna Jabłonowska. He married Katarzyna Opalińska, by whom he had a daughter, Maria, who became Queen-Consort of France as wife of Louis XV. In 1697, as Cupbearer of Poland, he signed the confirmation of the articles of election of August II the Strong. In 1703 he joined the Lithuanian Confederation, which the Sapieha s with the aid of Sweden had formed against August. [ King for the first time ] During his first reign before 1709 The following year, Stanisław was selected by Charles XII of Sweden after a successful Swedish invasion of Poland, to supersede Augustus II, who was hostile towards the Swedes. Leszczyński was a young man of blameless antecedents, respectable talents, and came from an ancient family, but certainly without sufficient force of character or political influence to sustain himself on so unstable a throne. Nevertheless, with the assistance of a bribing fund and an army corps, the Swedes succeeded in procuring his election by a scratch assembly of half a dozen castellan s and a few score of gentlemen on July 12, 1704. A few months later, Stanisław was forced by a sudden inroad of August to seek refuge in the Swedish camp, but finally on September 24, 1705, he was crowned king with great splendor. Charles himself supplied his nominee with a new crown and scepter in lieu of the ancient Polish regalia, which had been carried off to Saxony by August. During this time the King of Sweden sent Peter Estenberg to King Stanislaw to act as an ambassador and correspondence secretary. The Polish king&apos;s first act was to cement an alliance with Charles XII whereby the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth engaged to assist Sweden against the Russian tsar. Stanisław did what he could to assist his patron. Thus, he induced Ivan Mazepa, the Cossack hetman, to desert Peter the Great at the most critical period of the Great Northern War between Russia and Sweden, and Stanisław placed a small army corps at the disposal of the Swedes. But Stanisław depended so entirely on the success of Charles&apos; arms that after the Battle of Poltava (1709) Stanisław&apos;s authority vanished as a dream at the first touch of reality. During this period Stanisław resided in the town of Rydzyna. [ First loss of the throne ] King Stanisław Leszczyński and his family The vast majority of Poles hastened to repudiate Stanisław and make their peace with August. Henceforth a mere pensioner of Charles XII, Stanisław accompanied Krassow &apos;s army corps in its retreat to Swedish Pomerania. On the restoration of Augustus, Stanisław resigned the Polish Crown (though he retained the royal title) in exchange for the little principality of Zweibrücken. In 1716, an assassination was attempted by a Saxon officer, Lacroix, but Stanisław was saved by Stanisław Poniatowski, father of the future king. Leszczyński then resided at Wissembourg in Alsace. In 1725, he had the satisfaction of seeing his daughter Maria become the consort of Louis XV and queen of France. From 1725 to 1733, Stanisław lived at the Château de Chambord. [ King for the second time ] His son-in-law Louis XV supported his claims to the Polish throne after the death of August II the Strong in 1733, which led to the War of the Polish Succession. In September 1733, Stanisław himself arrived at Warsaw, having traveled night and day through central Europe disguised as a coachman. On the following day, despite many protests, Stanisław was duly elected King of Poland for the second time. However, Russia was opposed to any nominee of France and Sweden. Russia protested against his election at once, in favor of the new Elector of Saxony, as being the candidate of her Austrian ally. On June 30, 1734, a Russian army of 20,000 under Peter Lacy, after proclaiming August III the Saxon at Warsaw, proceeded to besiege Stanisław at Danzig, where he was entrenched with his partisans (including the Primate and the French and Swedish ministers) to await the relief that had been promised by France. The siege began in October 1734. On March 17, 1735, Marshal Münnich superseded Peter Lacy, and on May 20, 1735 the long-expected French fleet appeared and disembarked 2,400 men on Westerplatte. A week later, this little army gallantly attempted to force the Russian entrenchments, but was finally compelled to surrender. This was the first time that France and Russia had met as foes in the field. On June 30, 1735, Danzig capitulated unconditionally, after sustaining a siege of 135 days which cost the Russians 8,000 men. Disguised as a peasant, Stanisław had contrived to escape two days before. He reappeared at Königsberg, whence he issued a manifesto to his partisans which resulted in the formation of a confederatio n on his behalf, and the despatch of a Polish envoy to Paris to urge France to invade Saxony with at least 40,000 men. In Ukraine too, Count Nicholas Potocki kept on foot to support Stanisław a motley host of 50,000 men, which was ultimately scattered by the Russians. [ Final loss of the throne ] { On January 26, 1736, Stanisław again abdicated the throne, but received in compensation the } { Duchy of Lorraine and Bar, which was to revert to France on his death. In 1738, he sold his estates of } { Rydzyna and } { Leszno to Count (later Prince) Alexander Joseph } { Sułkowski. He settled at } { Lunéville, founded there the } { Academia Stanislaw and devoted himself for the rest of his life to science and philanthropy, engaging most notably in controversy with } { Rousseau. } Stanisław was still living at the time of the birth of his great-great-granddaughter, Archduchess Maria Theresa of Austria, in 1762. He died in 1766, aged 88. His works include Oeuvres du philosophe bienfaisant, Paris, 1763, 1866. [ Ancestors ] [ Stanisław Leszczyński Rafał Leszczyński Anna Jabłonowska Bogusław Leszczyński Anna Denhoffowa Stanisław Jan Jabłonowski Marianna Kazanowska Rafał Leszczyński Anna Radzimińska Kasper Doenhoff Anna Aleksandra Koniecpolska Jan Jabłonowski Anna Ostroróg Aleksander Dominik Kazanowski Anna Potocka Anna Radzimińska Kasper Doenhoff Anna Aleksandra Koniecpolska Jan Jabłonowski Anna Ostroróg Aleksander Dominik Kazanowski Anna Potocka ] [ Gallery ] Castle in Rydzyna was rebuilt in 1700 by Pompeo Ferrari on his order. Château de Chambord, where he lived between 1725 and 1733. Place Stanislas in Nancy was constructed between 1751 and 1755. Église Saint-Jacques in Lunéville was established by him in 1745. [ Further reading ] Zieliński, Ryszard (1978). Polka na francuskim tronie. Czytelnik. [ See also ] History of Poland (1569-1795) History of philosophy in Poland List of Poles [ External links ] [ Stanislaus I Leszczyński ] [ lccn-n80-159803 ] [ House of Leszczyński October 20, 1677 23 February 1766 ] [ August II the Strong August II the Strong 1704–1709 King of Poland ] [ August II the Strong August III the Saxon 1733–1736 King of Poland ] [ Duke of Lorraine Francis Stephen annexed by France 1737–1766 ] [ Leszczyński, Stanisław King of Poland October 20, 1677 Lwów, Poland February 23, 1766 Lunéville, France ] Category:1677 births Category:1766 deaths Category:People from Lviv Category:Roman Catholic monarchs Category:Polish monarchs Category:Grand Dukes of Lithuania Category:Secular senators of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth Stanislaw Leszczynski Category:Dukes of Lorraine Category:17th-century Polish people Category:18th-century Polish people Category:Polish people of the Great Northern War Category:People of the War of the Polish Succession Category:Supernumary Knights of the Order of the Holy Spirit an:Estanislau Leszczyński be:Станіслаў Ляшчынскі be-x-old:Станіслаў Ляшчынскі bg:Станислав Лешчински ca:Estanislau I de Polònia cs:Stanislav I. Leszczyński da:Stanislaw Leszczynski 1. af Polen de:Stanislaus I. Leszczyński es:Estanislao I Leszczynski eo:Stanislao la 1-a fr:Stanislas Leszczynski it:Stanislao Leszczyński he:סטניסלאב לשצ&apos;ינסקי, מלך פולין la:Stanislaus I (rex Poloniae) lv:Staņislavs Leščiņskis lt:Stanislovas Leščinskis hu:I. Szaniszló lengyel király mr:स्तानिस्लॉस पहिला, पोलंड nl:Stanislaus Leszczyński ja:スタニスワフ・レシチニスキ no:Stanisław I Leszczyński nn:Stanisław Leszczyński pl:Stanisław Leszczyński pt:Stanisław Leszczyński ro:Stanisław Leszczyński ru:Станислав Лещинский sk:Stanislav I. (Poľsko) fi:Stanisław Leszczyński sv:Stanisław I Leszczyński uk:Лещинський Станіслав vi:Stanisław Leszczyński zh:斯坦尼斯瓦夫一世