[ IHO ] { IHO logo.png } { 100px } { IHO Members.svg } [ #004080 Member states ] [ #800000 Approved, but awaiting membership ] [ #008000 Membership applications ] { 21 June 1921 } { International Hydrographic Bureau } { Monaco } { 81 maritime States } { English, } { French } { Directing Committee } { Alexandros Maratos (Greece) - President Hugo Gorziglia (Chile) - Director Robert Ward (Australia) - Director : (President-elect (1 Sep 2012)) } { http://www.iho.int/ } The International Hydrographic Organization (IHO) is the inter-governmental organisation representing the hydrographic community. It enjoys observer status at the UN and is the recognised competent authority on hydrographic surveying and nautical chart ing. When referring to hydrography and nautical charting in Conventions and similar Instruments, it is the IHO standards and specifications that are normally used. [ History ] The IHO was originally established in 1921 as the International Hydrographic Bureau (IHB). The present name was adopted in 1970 as a result of a revised international agreement among member nations. However, the former name International Hydrographic Bureau was retained for the IHO&apos;s administrative body of three Directors and a small staff at the organization&apos;s headquarters in Monaco. During the 19th century, many maritime nations established hydrographic offices to provide means for improving the navigation of naval and merchant vessel s by providing nautical publications, nautical charts, and other navigation al services. There were substantial differences in hydrographic procedures charts, and publications. In 1889, an International Marine Conference was held at Washington, D.C., and it was proposed to establish a &quot; permanent international commission. &quot; Similar proposals were made at the sessions of the International Congress of Navigation held at St. Petersburg in 1908 and again in 1912. In 1919 the hydrographers of Great Britain and France cooperated in taking the necessary steps to convene an international conference of hydrographers. London was selected as the most suitable place for this conference, and on 24 July 1919, the First International Conference opened, attended by the hydrographers of 24 nations. The object of the conference was &quot; To consider the advisability of all maritime nations adopting similar methods in preparation, construction, and production of their charts and all hydrographic publications; of rendering the results in the most convenient form to enable them to be readily used; of instituting a prompt system of mutual exchange of hydrographic information between all countries; and of providing an opportunity to consultations and discussions to be carried out on hydrographic subjects generally by the hydrographic experts of the world. &quot; This is still the major purpose of IHO. As a result of the conference, a permanent organization was formed and statutes for its operations were prepared. The IHB, now the IHO, began its activities in 1921 with 18 nations as members. The Principality of Monaco was selected because of its easy communication with the rest of the world and also because of the generous offer of Albert I, Prince of Monaco to provide suitable accommodations for the Bureau in the Principality. [ Functions ] The principal work undertaken by the IHO is: To bring about a close and permanent association between national hydrographic offices. To study matters relating to hydrography and allied sciences and techniques. To further the exchange of nautical charts and documents between hydrographic officers of member governments. To tender guidance and advice upon request, in particular to countries engaged in setting up or expanding their hydrographic service. To encourage coordination of hydrographic surveys with relevant oceanographic activities. To extend and facilitate the application of oceanographic knowledge for the benefit of navigators. To cooperate with international organizations and scientific institutions which have related objectives. The IHO develops hydrographic and nautical charting standards to be agreed upon by its Member States. All Member States then follow those standards in their surveys, nautical charts, and publications. The almost universal use of the standards means that the products and services from the world&apos;s hydrographic and oceanographic offices are increasingly consistent and recognisable for all seafarers and for other users. Much has been done in the field of standardisation since the Bureau (now the IHO) was founded. [ Publications ] Most IHO publications, including the standards, guidelines and associated documents such as the International Hydrographic Review, International Hydrographic Bulletin, the Hydrographic Dictionary and the Year book are available to the general public free from the IHO website. The IHO publishes the international standards related to charting and hydrography, including S-57 IHO Transfer Standard for Digital Hydrographic Data, the encoding standard that is used primarily for electronic navigational chart s. The IHO has introduced (January 2010) a new, contemporary hydrographic geospatial standard for modelling marine data and information, known as S-100. S-100 and any dependent product specifications are underpinned by an on-line registry available via the IHO website. S-100 is aligned with the ISO 19100 series of geographic standards, thereby making it fully compatible with contemporary geospatial data standards. Because S-100 is based on ISO 19100, it can be used by other data providers for their maritime related (non-hydrographic) data and information. This is already beginning to occur (2011) with various would-be data providers preparing themselves for the advent of the E-Navigation concept currently under active discussion in the UN International Maritime Organisation (IMO). [ Member states ] The following countries are members of the IHO: [ http://www.iho-ohi.net/english/home/about-the-iho/about-iho-member-states/ms-information.html IHO MEMBER STATES International Hydrographic Organization 29 January 2010 7 February 2010 ] Algeria Argentina Australia Bahrain Bangladesh Belgium Brazil Canada Cameroon Chile China Colombia Democratic Republic of Congo (suspended) Croatia Cuba Cyprus Denmark Dominican Republic (suspended) Ecuador Egypt Estonia Fiji Finland France Germany Greece Guatemala Iceland India Indonesia Iran Ireland Italy Jamaica Japan Democratic People&apos;s Republic of Korea Republic of Korea Kuwait Latvia Malaysia Mauritius Mexico Monaco Morocco Mozambique Myanmar Netherlands New Zealand Nigeria Norway Oman Pakistan Papua New Guinea Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Qatar Romania Russian Federation Saudi Arabia Serbia Singapore Slovenia South Africa Spain Sri Lanka Suriname Sweden Syrian Arab Republic Thailand Tonga Trinidad and Tobago Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Arab Emirates United Kingdom Uruguay United States ( NOAA, CNMOC, NGA ) Venezuela [ See also ] Convention on the International Hydrographic Organization General Bathymetric Chart of the Oceans International Association of Lighthouse Authorities e-Navigation concept [ References ] [ External links ] International Hydrographic Organization Hydrographic Blogspot Category:Hydrography Category:International organizations Category:United Nations General Assembly observers Category:Maritime organizations ar:المنظمة الهيدروغرافية الدولية an:Organización Hidrografica Internacional az:Beynəlxalq Hidroqrafiya Təşkilatı be:Міжнародная гідраграфічная арганізацыя be-x-old:Міжнародная гідраграфічная арганізацыя ca:Organització Hidrogràfica Internacional cy:Y Sefydliad Hydrograffig Rhyngwladol de:International Hydrographic Organization es:Organización Hidrográfica Internacional fa:سازمان آب‌نگاری بین‌المللی fr:Organisation hydrographique internationale fy:Ynternasjonale Hydrografyske Organisaasje gl:Organización Hidrográfica Internacional ko:국제 수로 기구 hi:अंतरराष्ट्रीय जल सर्वेक्षण संगठन id:Organisasi Hidrografi Internasional it:Organizzazione idrografica internazionale he:ארגון ההידרוגרפיה הבינלאומי la:Societas Hydrographica Internationalis mk:Меѓународна хидрографска организација ms:Pertubuhan Hidrografi Antarabangsa nl:Internationale Hydrografische Organisatie ja:国際水路機関 pl:Międzynarodowa Organizacja Hydrograficzna pt:Organização Hidrográfica Internacional ro:Organizația Hidrografică Internațională ru:Международная гидрографическая организация fi:International Hydrographic Organization sv:International Hydrographic Organization uk:Міжнародна гідрографічна організація zh:國際航道測量組織