[ September 2007 May 2009 ] [ 1503 8 12 y ] { Gottorp } [ 1559 1 1 1503 8 12 y ] { Koldinghus } { Roskilde Cathedral } { Lutheranism } Christian III (12 August 1503  – 1 January 1559) reigned as king of Denmark and Norway. He was the eldest son of King Frederick I and Anna of Brandenburg. { &apos;&apos;Christian 3&apos;&apos; (Dansk Konge) } [ Childhood ] [ House of Oldenburg ] Christian was born in 1503 at Gottorf Castle which Frederick I had made a primary residence. In 1514, when he was just ten years old, Christian&apos;s mother died. Four years later, his father remarried to Sophie of Pomerania (1498–1568). Frederick was elected king of Denmark in the place of his nephew, Christian II in 1523. The young prince Christian&apos;s first public service after his father became king was the reduction of Copenhagen, which stood firm for the fugitive Christian II. As stadtholder of the Duchies of Holstein and Schleswig in 1526, and as viceroy of Norway in 1529, Christian III displayed considerable administrative ability. [ Religious Views ] [ Reformation in Denmark-Norway and Holstein ] Christian&apos;s earliest teacher, Wolfgang von Utenhof, and his Lutheran tutor, the military general Johann Rantzau, were both zealous reformers who had a influence on the young prince. At their urging, while traveling in Germany in 1521, he made himself present at the Diet of Worms to hear Martin Luther speak. Luther&apos;s arguments intrigued him. The prince made no secret of his Lutheran views. His outspokenness brought him into conflict, not only with the Catholic Rigsraad, but also with his cautious and temporizing father. At his own court at Schleswig he did his best to introduce the Protestant Reformation, despite the opposition of the bishops. He made the Lutheran Church the State Church of Schleswig-Holstein with the Church Ordinance of 1528. There was some talk of passing him over in the succession to the throne in favour of his younger half-brother John &apos;&apos;the Elder&apos;&apos; (Hans den Ældre), who had been brought up in traditional Catholic Christianity. [ Early Reign ] [ Election of Christian III ] Seal of Christian III After his father&apos;s death, in 1533, Christian was proclaimed king at an assembly in Rye, a town in eastern Jutland, in 1534. The Danish State Council (rigsraad), dominated by the still Catholic bishops and nobles, refused to accept Duke Christian as king and turned to Count Christopher of Oldenburg in order to restore Christian II to the Danish throne (Christian II had supported both the New and Old Faiths at various times). In opposition to King Christian III, Count Christopher was proclaimed regent at the Ringsted Assembly (landsting), and at the Skåne Assembly ( landsting) at St Liber&apos;s Hill at Lund Cathedral. This resulted in a two-year civil war, known as the Count&apos;s Feud (Grevens Fejde, 1534–36), between Protestant and Catholic forces. [ Civil War (Count&apos;s Feud) ] [ Count&apos;s Feud ] Count Christopher had the support of most of Zealand, Scania, the Hanseatic League, and the small farmers of northern Jutland and Funen. Christian III found his support among the nobles of Jutland. In 1534, the Catholic peasants under Skipper Clement began an uprising in northern Jutland, pillaging the holdings of Lutheran nobles. An army of nobles and their vassals assembled at Svendstrup and suffered a terrible defeat at the hands of the peasants. Realizing his hold on the throne was in imminent danger, Christian III negotiated a deal with the Hansa States which allowed him to send his trusted advisor Johan Rantzau north with an army of Protestant German mercenaries. Clement and his army fled north, taking refuge inside the walls of Aalborg. In December, Rantzau&apos;s forces breached the walls and stormed the city. In the following days 3,000 people were massacred and the city was plundered by the Protestant German mercenaries. Clement managed to escape the slaughter, but was apprehended a few days later. He was tried and beheaded in 1535. His body was cut apart and placed on a sty, a lead crown was placed on Clement&apos;s spiked head. With Jutland more or less secure, Christian next focused on gaining control of Scania. He appealed to the Protestant Swedish king Gustav Vasa for help in subduing the rebels. Gustav immediately obliged by sending two armies to ravage central Scania and Halland. The Catholic peasants suffered a bloody defeat at Loshult. The Lutheran Swedes moved against Helsingborg Castle, which surrendered in January 1535 and was burned to the ground. Rantzau moved his army to Funen and defeated Count Christopher&apos;s army at Øksnebjerg in June 1535. Count Christopher&apos;s forces held out in Malmø and Copenhagen until July 1536 when they surrendered after several months of siege by Christian II&apos;s forces. With their capitulation, Christian III was firmly emplaced upon Denmark&apos;s throne, and the Catholic forces in Denmark were subdued. [ After the war ] [ Reformation in Denmark-Norway and Holstein ] A mutual confidence between a king who had conquered his kingdom and a people who had stood in arms against him was not attainable immediately. The circumstances under which Christian III ascended the throne exposed Denmark to the danger of foreign domination. It was with the help of the gentry of the Germanic duchies that Christian had conquered Denmark. Holsatian and other German noblemen had led his armies and directed his diplomacy. The first six years of Christian III&apos;s reign were marked by a contest between the Danish Rigsraadet and the German counsellors, both of whom sought to rule through the king. Though the Danish party won a victory at the outset, by obtaining the insertion in the charter of provisions stipulating that only native-born Danes should fill the highest dignities of the state, the king&apos;s German Lutheran counsellors continued paramount during his early reign. The triumph of a German speaking Lutheran like Christian III would eventually bring about an end to traditional Christianity in Denmark, but Catholics still controlled the Council of State. Christian III ordered the arrest of three of the bishops on the State Council by his German mercenaries (12 August 1536). Martin Luther wrote to the king congratulating him on his success. Christian&apos;s debt for the Count&apos;s Feud was enormous and confiscating the Church lands (farmed by peasants who had been free from vassalage duties to the nobles) enabled him to pay down the debt to his creditors. The ultimate gainers from the confiscations were the nobles who led the New Faith imported from Germany. Christian&apos;s Protestant policies led Denmark toward the establishment of the Danish Lutheran Church as the national church of Denmark (Folkekirke). This occurred officially on 30 October 1536 when the reconstituted State Council (purged of Catholics) adopted the Lutheran Ordinances designed by the German Johannes Bugenhagen, which outlined church organization, liturgy, and accepted religious practice. Monasteries, nunneries, priories were closed and the property taken by the crown (see Chronicle of the Expulsion of the Grayfriars ). Vast tracts of land were handed out to the king&apos;s supporters. Churches were closed, cathedral schools terminated, and recalcitrant priests turned out of their parishes. Catholic bishops were imprisoned unless they agreed to marry and give up their privileges. Some submitted after years of imprisonment; others refused to accept the New Faith and became martyrs. [ Later reign ] [ Schmalkaldic League First Treaty of Brömsebro (1541) Treaty of Speyer (1544) ] The dangers threatening Christian III from the emperor Charles V and other kinsmen of the imprisoned Christian II convinced him of the necessity to lessen the discontent in the land by relying on Danish magnates and nobles. { First Treaty of Brömsebro : Christian III&apos;s meeting with } { Gustav I of Sweden in } { Brömsebro, 1541 ( } { watercolor reproduction of a lost painting made during the Swedish King&apos;s reign) } At the Herredag of Copenhagen, 1542, the newly enriched nobility of Denmark voted Christian a twentieth part of all their property to pay off his heavy debt to the Holsatians and other Germans. The pivot of the foreign policy of Christian III was his alliance with the German Protestant princes, as a counterpoise to the persistent hostility of Charles V, who was determined to support the hereditary claims of his nieces, the daughters of Christian II, to the Scandinavian kingdoms.War was declared against Charles V in 1542, and, though the German Protestant princes proved faithless allies, the closing of the Sound against Dutch shipping proved such an effective weapon in King Christian&apos;s hand that the Netherlands compelled Charles V to make peace with Denmark at the diet of Speyer, on 23 May 1544. [ Partition of Holstein and Schleswig ] Until this peace, Christian III ruled the entire Duchies of Holstein and of Schleswig also in the name of his then still minor half-brothers John &apos;&apos;the Elder&apos;&apos; (Hans den Ældre) and Adolf. They determined their youngest brother Frederick, Prince of Denmark for a career as Lutheran administrator of an ecclesiastical state within the Holy Roman Empire. { In 1551 Frederick became administrator of the Lutheran } { Prince-Bishopric of Hildesheim, comprising ecclesiastical and secular power, and, however, lacking secular power Bishop of Schleswig with the pertaining revenues from episcopal estates. } In 1544 the elder three brothers partitioned Holstein (a fief of the Holy Roman Empire ) and Schleswig (a Danish fief) in an unusual way, following negotiations between the brothers and the Estates of the Realm of the duchies, which opposed a factual partition. So the revenues of the duchies were divided into three equal shares by assigning the revenues of particular areas and landed estates to each of the three brothers, while other general revenues, such as taxes from towns and customs dues, were levied together but then shared among the brothers. The estates, whose revenues were assigned to the parties, made Holstein and Schleswig look like patchworks, technically inhibiting the emergence of separate new duchies, as intended by the estates of the duchies. { Cf. Carsten Porskrog Rasmussen, &quot; Die dänischen Könige als Herzöge von Schleswig und Holstein &quot;, Frauke Witte and Marion Hartwig (trls.), in: Die Fürsten des Landes: Herzöge und Grafen von Schleswig, Holstein und Lauenburg [De slevigske hertuger; German], Carsten Porskrog Rasmussen (ed.) on behalf of the Gesellschaft für Schleswig-Holsteinische Geschichte, Neumünster: Wachholtz, 2008, pp. 73-109, here pp. 87seq. ISBN 978-3-529-02606-5 } The secular rule in the fiscally divided duchies thus became a (international law) condominium of the parties. As an effect both separate duchies, Holstein and Schleswig, with shares of each party scattered in both duchies, provided them with a condominial government binding both together, partially superseding their legally different affiliation as Holy Roman and Danish fiefs. As dukes of Holstein and Schleswig, the three brothers bore the formal title of &quot; Duke of Schleswig, Holstein, Ditmarsh and Stormarn &quot;. John the Elder conveniently called Duke of Schleswig-Holstein-Haderslev produced no issue, so no branch emerged from his side. Adolf founded a cadet branch of the royal Danish House of Oldenburg called House of Holstein-Gottorp, a convenient usage for the technically more correct Duke of Schleswig and Holstein at Gottorp. Similarly Christian III&apos;s youngest son John &apos;&apos;the Younger&apos;&apos; gained for himself and his heirs a share in Holstein&apos;s and Schleswig&apos;s revenues in 1564, comprising a third of the royal share, a ninth of Holstein and Schleswig from a fiscal point of view. John the Younger and his heirs, however, had no share in the condominial rule. [ Final years ] The foreign policy of Christian&apos;s later days was regulated by the peace of Speyer. He carefully avoided all foreign complications; refused to participate in the Schmalkaldic war of 1546; mediated between the emperor and Saxony after the fall of Maurice of Saxony at the Battle of Sievershausen in 1553. King Christian III died on New Year&apos;s Day 1559 at Koldinghus and was interred in Roskilde Cathedral. { &apos;&apos;Christian 3. King of Denmark · Norway 1534-59&apos;&apos; (Danish Kings and Their History) } [ Children ] Christian married Dorothea of Saxe-Lauenburg on 29 October 1525 at Lauenburg Castle. They were the parents of five children; Anna of Denmark (1532–1585). Consort to Augustus, Elector of Saxony. Frederick II (1534–1588). Magnus, King of Livonia (1540–1583). Johann II, Duke of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Plon (John the Younger; 1545–1622). Dorothea of Denmark (1546–1617). Consort to William, Duke of Brunswick-Lüneburg and mother to George, Duke of Brunswick-Lüneburg. [ Ancestry ] [ 100% ] [ 1. Christian III of Denmark 2. Frederick I of Denmark 3. Anna of Brandenburg 4. Christian I of Denmark 5. Dorothea of Brandenburg 6. John Cicero, Elector of Brandenburg 7. Margaret of Thuringia 8. Theodoric, Count of Oldenburg 9. Helvig of Schauenburg 10. John, Margrave of Brandenburg-Kulmbach 11. Barbara of Saxe-Wittenberg 12. Albrecht III, Elector of Brandenburg 13. Margaret of Baden 14. William III of Saxony and Thuringia, Duke of Luxembourg 15. Anne, Duchess of Luxembourg 16. Christian V, Count of Oldenburg 17. Agnes von Honstein 18. Gerhard VI of Holstein-Rendsburg, Duke of Schleswig 19. Catherine Elisabeth of Brunswick and Lunenburg 20. Frederick I, Elector of Brandenburg (=#24) 21. Elisabeth of Bavaria-Landshut (=#25) 22. Rudolf III, Duke of Saxe-Wittenberg 23. Anna of Thuringia 24. Frederick I, Elector of Brandenburg (=#20) 25. Elisabeth of Bavaria-Landshut (=#21) 26. Jacob, Margrave of Baden-Baden 27. Catherine of Lorraine 28. Frederick I, Elector of Saxony 29. Katharina of Brünswick-Lüneburg 30. Albert II of Germany 31. Elisabeth of Bohemia 24. Frederick I, Elector of Brandenburg (=#20) 25. Elisabeth of Bavaria-Landshut (=#21) 26. Jacob, Margrave of Baden-Baden 27. Catherine of Lorraine 28. Frederick I, Elector of Saxony 29. Katharina of Brünswick-Lüneburg 30. Albert II of Germany 31. Elisabeth of Bohemia ] [ Notes ] [ References ] [ Christian III of Denmark ] [ House of Oldenburg 12 August 1503 1 January 1559 Christian III ] [ 2 Frederick I ] [ King of Denmark 1534–1559 ] [ 2 Frederick II ] [ King of Norway 1537–1559 ] [ 1 Frederick I and Christian II ] [ 1 Duke of Holstein and Schleswig Frederick I 1523-1533 John 1544-1559 Adolf 1544-1559 1523–1559 ] [ 1 John the Elder, Adolf and Frederick II ] [ Christian 03 Of Denmark King of Denmark 12 August 1503 Gottorp 1 January 1559 Koldinghus ] Category:1503 births Category:1559 deaths Category:People from Schleswig Category:Danish monarchs Category:Norwegian monarchs Category:Dukes of Schleswig Category:Dukes of Holstein Category:House of Oldenburg Category:Protestant monarchs Category:Converts to Lutheranism from Roman Catholicism Category:Denmark–Norway Category:Burials at Roskilde Cathedral ar:كريستيان الثالث ca:Cristià III de Dinamarca cs:Kristián III. Dánský da:Christian 3. de:Christian III. (Dänemark und Norwegen) et:Christian III es:Cristián III de Dinamarca eo:Kristiano la 3-a (Danio-Norvegio) fr:Christian III de Danemark hr:Kristijan III. is:Kristján 3. it:Cristiano III di Danimarca lt:Kristijonas III nl:Christiaan III van Denemarken ja:クリスチャン3世 (デンマーク王) no:Christian III av Danmark og Norge nn:Kristian III av Danmark-Noreg pl:Chrystian III Oldenburg pt:Cristiano III da Dinamarca e Noruega ro:Christian al III-lea al Danemarcei ru:Кристиан III (король Дании) sl:Kristijan III. fi:Kristian III sv:Kristian III av Danmark uk:Кристіан III zh:克里斯蒂安三世