[ December 2009 ] { Region } { Latin America and the Caribbean } Antigua Guatemala (commonly referred to as just Antigua or la Antigua) is a city in the central highlands of Guatemala famous for its well-preserved Spanish Mudéjar -influenced { Buriedmirror.com, citing S.D. Markman, &apos;&apos;Colonial Architecture of Antigua Guatemala&apos;&apos; } Baroque architecture as well as a number of spectacular ruins of colonial church es. It has been designated a UNESCO World Heritage Site. Antigua Guatemala serves as the municipal seat for the surrounding municipality of the same name. It also serves as the departmental capital of Sacatepéquez Department. [ Population ] Homestead in ruins of a colonial Spanish building; Volcánes de Fuego (left) and Acatenango visible in distance The city had a peak population of some 60,000 in the 1770s; the bulk of the population moved away in the late 18th century. Despite significant population growth in the late 20th century, the city had only reached half that number by the 1990s. According to the 2007 census, the city has some 34,685 inhabitants. [ History ] Antigua Guatemala means &quot; Ancient Guatemala &quot; and was the third capital of Guatemala. The first capital of Guatemala was founded on the site of a Kakchikel-Maya city, now called Iximche, on Monday, July 25, 1524—the day of Saint James—and therefore named Ciudad de Santiago de los Caballeros de Goathemalan (City of Saint James of the Knights of Guatemala). Naturally, St. James became the patron saint of the city. Palacio de los Capitanes Generales, Antigua Guatemala. Façade of the former El Carmen church After several Cakchiquel uprisings, the capital was moved to a more suitable site in the Valley of Alotenango (Rio Guacalate) on November 22, 1527, and kept its original name. This new city was located on the site of present-day San Miguel Escobar, { Lutz, Christopher H. (1997) Santiago de Guatemala, 1541-1773: City, Caste, and the Colonial Experience University of Oklahoma Press, pp.10 &amp; 258 } which is a neighborhood in the municipality of Ciudad Vieja. This city was destroyed on September 11, 1541 by a devastating lahar from the Volcán de Agua. [ 1402-10= Agua 2008-08-03 ] As a result, the colonial authorities decided to move the capital once more, this time five miles away to the Panchoy Valley. So, on March 10, 1543 the Spanish conquistadors founded present-day Antigua, and again, it was named Santiago de los Caballeros. For more than 200 years it served as the seat of the military governor of the Spanish colony of Guatemala, a large region that included almost all of present-day Central America and the southernmost State of Mexico: Chiapas. In 1566 King Felipe II of Spain gave it the title of &quot; Muy Noble y Muy Leal &quot; ( &quot; Very Noble and Very Loyal &quot; ). On September 29, 1717, an estimated 7.4 magnitude earthquake hit Antigua Guatemala, and destroyed over 3,000 buildings. Much of the city&apos;s architecture was ruined. The damage the earthquake did to the city made authorities consider moving the capital to another city. In 1773, the Santa Marta earthquake s destroyed much of the town, which led to the third change in location for the city. { Foster, Lynn V. (2000). A Brief History of Central America.. New York: Facts On File, Inc. ISBN 0-8160-3962-3. } The Spanish Crown ordered (1776) the removal of the capital to a safer location, the Valley of the Shrine, where Guatemala City, the modern capital of Guatemala, now stands. This new city did not retain its old name and was christened Nueva Guatemala de la Asunción (New Guatemala of the Assumption) and its patron saint is Our Lady of Assumption. The badly damaged city of Santiago de los Caballeros was ordered abandoned, although not everyone left, and was thereafter referred to as la Antigua Guatemala (the Old Guatemala). [ Antigua today ] Central Park (Parque Central) is the heart of the city. The reconstructed fountain there is a popular gathering spot. Off to the side of the Central Park, the Arco de Santa Catalina is among the many notable architectural landmarks of La Antigua. { Cathedral, 1979 } La Antigua is noted for its very elaborate religious celebrations during Lent ( Cuaresma ), leading up to Holy Week (Semana Santa) and Easter (Pascua). Each Sunday in Lent, one of the local parish es sponsor a Procession through the streets of Antigua. Elaborate and beautiful artistic carpets predominantly made of dyed sawdust, flowers and even fruits and vegetables adorn the processions&apos; path. Due to its popularity amongst tourists and its very well developed tourism infrastructure, Antigua Guatemala is often used as a central location in which many choose to set up base and from here, visit other tourist areas in Guatemala and Central America. Cruise ships that dock at Guatemalan ports offer trips to Antigua from both the Pacific and Atlantic. Antigua also holds a sizeable retirement community from the US as well as Europe as its colonial charm has appealed to many who have crossed paths with this enchanting and romantic town. [ Economy ] Tourism is the main driver of the economy. Antigua is also a coffee-producing region of Anacafé. Tourists visiting Antigua, 2005 [ Language schools ] Antigua is known as a destination for people who want to learn Spanish through immersion. There are many Spanish language schools in Antigua and it is one of the most popular and best recognized centers for Spanish language study by students from Europe and North America. Language institutes are one of the primary industries of Antigua, along with tourism. [ Education ] The University of San Carlos in Antigua was founded by the Papal Bull of Pope Innocent XI issued dated 18 June 1687. [ Sports ] Antigua GFC football club has played in the Guatemala top division for several years but have been playing in the second division lately. Their home stadium is the Estadio Pensativo which has a capacity of 9,000. They are nicknamed Los panzas verdes ( &quot; Green bellies &quot; ). [ Cuisine ] A number of restaurants can be found in Antigua. Many small eateries can be found at the Antigua marketplace located next to the central bus stop, next to the main market. In Antigua one can find restaurants serving Mediterranean, Italian, Asian and American, as well as traditional Guatemalan cuisine. [ Tourism ] Antigua is a growing tourist destination in Guatemala as it is close to Guatemala City but is much calmer and safer, with more tourist oriented activities. It is possible to take buses from Antigua to many parts of Guatemala, many travel agencies offer shuttles to the main touristic places: Monterrico beach, Atitlan Lake, Coban, Tikal or even Copan in Honduras, though the transportation is more central in Guatemala City.Antigua is also known for its chocolate makers: At ChocoMuseo, the museum of cacao and chocolate you can learn how the Mayas were using cacao and make your own chocolate inside the artisanal factory. Other places such as Chocolalala, Fernando&apos;s Koffee and Chocolarti make and sell chocolate. [ Important ruins and other tourist attractions ] Palacio de los Capitanes, Plaza Central { La Merced Church, 2009 } Church and Convent of Capuchins Cathedral of San José La Merced Church La Recolección Architectural Complex Ruins of old San José Old weapons Museum Church School of Christ San Francisco Church Santo Domingo Monastery Hermano Pedro&apos;s Hospital The cacao and chocolate museum Museum of the Old Book (El Libro Antiguo) Museum of Colonial Art, in the former San Carlos University Building The Jade museum Casa del Turista [ Volcanoes ] Arch connecting two parts of old Convent, Volcán de Agua in background Three large volcano es dominate the horizon around Antigua. The most commanding, to the south of the city, is the Volcán de Agua or &quot; Volcano of Water &quot;, some 3766 meters (12,356  ft) high. When the Spanish arrived, the inhabitants of the zone, Kakchikel Mayas, called it Hunapú (and they still do). However, it became known as Volcán de Agua after a lahar from the volcano buried the second site of the capital, which prompted the Spanish authorities to move the capital to present-day Antigua. The original site of the 2nd capital is now the village San Miguel Escobar. To the west of the city are a pair of peaks, Acatenango, last erupted in 1972, some 3976 meters (13045  ft) high, and the Volcán de Fuego or &quot; Volcano of Fire &quot;, some 3763 meters (12346  ft) high. &quot; Fuego &quot; is famous for being almost constantly active at a low level. Steam and gas issue from its top daily, but larger eruptions are rare. [ Sister cities ] [ Florida ] Coral Gables, Florida, USA List of sister cities in Guatemala from Sister Cities International Puebla de Los Angeles, Mexico Zapopan, Jalisco, Mexico Tlaquepaque, Jalisco, Mexico Valparaíso, Chile Granada (Nicaragua) San Francisco de Quito, Ecuador Glendale, California, USA Sevilla, Spain [ Gallery ] Courtyard in La Merced Church, featuring Antigua&apos;s largest water fountain A derelict church building The Santa Catalina arch Antigua Guatemala Cathedral Church ruins The re-constructed Central Park fountain Antigua Street with Volcan de Agua in the background Looking toward Volcan de Agua [ References ] [ http://www.tutiempo.net/Tierra/Guatemala/Municipio-de-Ciudad-Vieja-GT002573.html Municipio de Ciudad Vieja Santos, Bairon La Tierra http://www.webcitation.org/5zOUEa3bJ June 12, 2011 June 12, 2011 ] [ External links ] [ Guatemala New Spain ] Official Site in Spanish [ 14 34 N 90 44 W region:GT_type:city title ] Category:Guatemala City Category:Municipalities of the Sacatepéquez Department Category:Populated places in Guatemala Category:Populated places established in 1543 Category:Colonial Central America Category:World Heritage Sites in Guatemala Category:Spanish Colonial architecture Category:New Spain ca:Antigua Guatemala cs:Antigua Guatemala de:Antigua Guatemala es:Antigua Guatemala eo:Antikva Gvatemalo (urbo) fr:Antigua Guatemala gl:Antiga Guatemala - Antigua Guatemala hr:Antigua Guatemala it:Antigua Guatemala he:אנטיגואה גואטמלה ka:ანტიგუა-გვატემალა lt:Antigva Gvatemala nah:Huehcāuh Cuauhtēmallān nl:Antigua Guatemala (plaats) ja:アンティグア・グアテマラ no:Antigua Guatemala pl:Antigua Guatemala pt:Antigua Guatemala ro:Antigua, Guatemala ru:Антигуа-Гуатемала sk:Antigua Guatemala sr:Антигва Гватемала fi:Antigua (Guatemala) sv:Antigua Guatemala ta:ஆன்டிகுவா குவாத்தமாலா tr:Antigua Guatemala uk:Антіґуа-Ґватемала vi:Antigua Guatemala zh:安地瓜