[ August 2010 ] [ United Kingdom ] { British Empire } { Zulu Kingdom } { Sir Henry Bartle Frere } { Frederic Thesiger, Lt. General Lord Chelmsford } { Lt. General Garnet Wolseley } { Cetshwayo kaMpande, } { Ntshingwayo Khoza, } { Dabulamanzi kaMpande } { 1st invasion:15,000–16,000: Colenso, 1880, pp. 263–264 gives 6,669 Imperial and Colonial troops and 9,035 Native Contingent. Morris,Donald R.; Buthelezi, Mangosuthu The Washing of the Spears, Da Capo Press, 1998, p.292, gives 16,800. } { * 6,600 British troops * 9,000 Africans 17 cannon 1 } { Gatling gun 1 rocket battery 2nd invasion:25,000: Morris,Donald R. (1994) The Washing of the Spears, reissued: Da Capo Press, 1998, p.498. } { Colenso, 1880, p. 396, gives British strength in April as 22,545. } { * 16,000 British troops * 7,000 Natal natives * 2,000–3,000 civilian transport } { 35,000 Colenso, 1880, p.318, gives the total strength of the Zulu army at 35,000, of which 4,000 remained with Cetshwayo while the rest marched in two columns. } { 1,727 killed 256 wounded } { 6,000+ killed Knight &amp; Castle, Zulu War, 2004, p.115. } The Anglo-Zulu War was fought in 1879 between the British Empire and the Zulu Kingdom. Following a campaign by which Lord Carnarvon had successfully brought about federation in Canada, it was thought that similar combined military and political campaigns might succeed with the various African kingdoms, tribal areas and Boer republics in South Africa. In 1874, Sir Henry Bartle Frere was sent to South Africa as High Commissioner for the British Empire to bring the plans into being. Among the obstacles were the presence of the independent states of the South African Republic and the Kingdom of Zululand and its army. { Knight (1992, 2002), p. 8. } Frere, on his own initiative, without the approval of the British government { Spiers, p. 41 } { Ian Knight, Zulu War, Osprey, 2004, p. 9, &quot; By late 1878 Frere had manipulated a diplomatic crisis with the Zulus... &quot; } and with the intent of instigating a war with the Zulu, had presented an ultimatum on 11 December 1878, to the Zulu king Cetshwayo with which the Zulu king could not comply. { Colenso, pp. 261–262. Also: Ian Knight, Zulu War, Osprey, 2004, p. 11, &quot;... an ultimatum with which, Frere knew, they could not possibly comply. &quot; } Cetshwayo did not comply and Bartle Frere sent Lord Chelmsford to invade Zululand. { Morris, pp. 291–292 } The war is notable for several particularly bloody battles, including a stunning opening victory by the Zulu at Isandlwana, as well as for being a landmark in the timeline of imperialism in the region. The war eventually resulted in a British victory and the end of the Zulu nation&apos;s independence. [ Background ] [ British Empire ] By the 1870s the British Empire had colonies in southern Africa bordering on various Boer settlements, native African kingdoms such as the Zulus, and numerous indigenous tribal areas and states. Various interactions with these resulted in an expansionist policy. Cape Colony was formed after the Anglo-Dutch Treaty of 1814 permanently ceded the Dutch colony of Cape Town to Britain, and its territory expanded very substantially through the 1800s. The Colony of Natal was a British colony in south-eastern Africa that had been proclaimed a British colony on May 4, 1843 after the British government had annexed the Boer Republic of Natalia. The discovery of diamonds in 1867 near the Vaal River, some 550 miles (890  km) northeast of Cape Town, ended the isolation of the Boers in the interior and changed South African history. The discovery triggered a &quot; diamond rush &quot; that attracted people from all over the world turning Kimberley into a town of 50,000 within five years and drawing the attention of British imperial interests. In the 1870s, the British annexed West Griqualand, site of the Kimberley diamond discoveries. In 1874 Lord Carnarvon, Secretary of State for the Colonies, who had successfully brought about federation in Canada in 1867, thought that a similar scheme might work in South Africa. The South African plan called for a ruling white minority over a subjugated black majority providing a large pool of cheap labor for the Boer farmers and British sugar plantations and mines. { Gump, James O.. The Dust Rose like Smoke: The Subjugation of the Zulu and the Sioux, Bison Books, 1996, ISBN 0-8032-7059-3, Chapter 5, Agents of Empire, pp.73–93. } Carnarvon, in an attempt to extend British influence in 1875 approached the Boer states of the Orange Free State and the Transvaal Republic and tried to organize a federation of the British and Boer territories but the Boer leaders turned him down. In 1877, Sir Bartle Frere was made High Commissioner for Southern Africa by Lord Carnarvon. Carnarvon appointed Frere to the position on the understanding that he would work to enforce Carnarvon&apos;s confederation plan and, in return, Frere could then become the first British governor of a federated southern Africa n dominion. Frere was sent to South Africa as High Commissioner to bring it about. One of the obstacles to such a scheme was the presence of the independent states of the South African Republic, informally known as the Transvaal Republic, and the Kingdom of Zululand. Bartle Frere wasted no time in putting the scheme forward and manufacturing a casus belli against the Zulu by exaggerating the significance of number of recent incidents. { Gump, James O.. The Dust Rose like Smoke: The Subjugation of the Zulu and the Sioux, Bison Books, 1996, ISBN 0-8032-7059-3, p. 91. } { Bartle Frere } By 1877, Sir Theophilus Shepstone, the British Secretary for Native Affairs in Natal, annexed the Transvaal Republic, for Britain using a special warrant. The Transvaal Boers objected but as long as the Zulu threat remained, found themselves between two threats; they feared that if they took up arms to resist the British annexation actively, King Cetshwayo and the Zulus would take the opportunity to attack. The successive British annexations, and in particular the annexation of West Griqualand, however caused a climate of simmering unease for the Boer republics. Shepstone, in his capacity as British governor of Natal, had expressed concerns about the Zulu army under King Cetshwayo and the potential threat to Natal especially given the adoption by some of the Zulus of old muskets and other out of date firearms. In his new role of Administrator of the Transvaal, he was now responsible for protecting the Transvaal and had direct involvement in the Zulu border dispute from the side of the Transvaal. Persistent Boer representations and Paul Kruger &apos;s diplomatic manoeuvrings added to the pressure. There were incidents involving Zulu paramilitary actions on either side of the Transvaal/Natal border, and Shepstone increasingly began to regard King Cetshwayo, who now found no defender in Natal save Bishop Colenso, as having permitted such &quot; outrages, &quot; and to be in a &quot; defiant mood. &quot; Colenso advocated for native Africans in Natal and Zululand who had been unjustly treated by the colonial regime in Natal. In 1874 he took up the cause of Langalibalele and the Hlubi and Ngwe tribes in representations to the Colonial Secretary, Lord Carnarvon. Langalibalele had been falsely accused of rebellion in 1873 and, following a charade of a trial, was found guilty and imprisoned on Robben Island. In taking the side of Langalibalele against the Colonial regime in Natal and Theophilus Shepstone, the Secretary for Native Affairs, Colenso found himself even further estranged from colonial society in Natal. Bishop Colenso&apos;s concern about the misleading information that was being provided to the Colonial Secretary in London by Shepstone and the Governor of Natal prompted him to champion the cause of the Zulus against Boer oppression and official encroachments. He was a prominent critic of Sir Bartle Frere&apos;s efforts to depict the Zulu kingdom as a threat to Natal. Colenso&apos;s campaigns revealed the dark, racist foundation underpinning the colonial regime in Natal and made him enemies among the colonists. The British Prime Minister Disraeli &apos;s Tory administration in London did not want a war with the Zulus. &quot; The fact is, &quot; wrote Sir Michael Hicks Beach, who would replace Carnarvon as Secretary of State for the Colonies, in November 1878, &quot; that matters in Eastern Europe and India  ... were so serious an aspect that we cannot have a Zulu war in addition to other greater and too possible troubles. &quot; However Sir Bartle Frere had already been in to the Cape Colony as governor and high commissioner since 1877 with the brief of creating a Confederation of South Africa from the various British colonies, Boer Republics and native states and his plans were well advanced. He had concluded that the powerful Zulu kingdom stood in the way of this, and so was receptive to Shepstone&apos;s arguments that King Cetshwayo and his Zulu army posed a threat to the peace of the region. Preparations for a British invasion of the Zulu kingdom had been underway for months. In December 1878, notwithstanding the reluctance of the British government to start yet another colonial war, Frere presented Cetshwayo with an ultimatum that the Zulu army be disbanded and the Zulus accept a British resident. This was unacceptable to the Zulus as it effectively meant that Cetshwayo, had he agreed, would have lost his throne. [ Zulu Kingdom ] Photograph of Cetshwayo, c.  1875 Shaka, the first Zulu king, had, through war and conquest, built the small Zulu tribe into the Zulu Kingdom which by 1825 encompassed an area of around 11,500 square miles (30,000  km 2 ). In 1828 he was assassinated at Dukuza by one of his iNdunas and two of his half-brothers, one of which, Dingane kaSenzangakhona, succeeded him as king. By the 1830s migrating Boers came into conflict with the Zulu Kingdom then ruled by Dingane. Dingane suffered a crushing defeat on 16 December 1838, when he attacked a group of 470 Voortrekker settlers led by Pretorius at the Battle of Blood River. Dingane&apos;s half brother Mpande kaSenzangakhona then defected with some 17,000 followers and allied with the Boers against Dingane. Dingane was assassinated and Mpande became king of the Zulu empire. In 1839, the Boer Voortrekkers, under Pretorius, formed the Boer Republic of Natalia, south of the Tugela, and west of the British settlement of Port Natal (now Durban). Mpande and Pretorius maintained peaceful relations. However, in 1842, war broke out between the British and the Boers, resulting in the British annexation of Natalia. Mpande shifted his allegiance to the British, and remained on good terms with them. In 1843, Mpande ordered a purge of perceived dissidents within his kingdom. This resulted in numerous deaths, and the fleeing of thousands of refugees into neighbouring areas, including the British-controlled Natal. Many of these refugees fled with cattle, the main measure of Zulu wealth. Mpande began raiding the surrounding areas, culminating in the invasion of Swaziland in 1852. However, the British pressured him into withdrawing, which he did shortly. At this time, a battle for the succession broke out between two of Mpande&apos;s sons, Cetshwayo and Mbuyazi. This culminated in 1856 with the Battle of Ndondakusuka, which left Mbuyazi dead. Cetshwayo then set about usurping his father&apos;s authority. When Mpande died of old age in 1872, Cetshwayo took over as ruler. In 1862, Umtonga, a brother of Cetshwayo, and another son of Zulu king Mpande, fled to the Utrecht district, and Cetshwayo assembled an army on that frontier. According to claims later brought forward by the Boer s, Cetshwayo offered the farmers a strip of land along the border if they would surrender his brother. The Boers complied on the condition that Umtonga&apos;s life was spared, and in 1861 Mpande signed a deed transferring this land to the Boers. The south boundary of the land added to Utrecht ran from Rorke&apos;s Drift on the Buffalo to a point on the Pongola River. The boundary was beaconed in 1864, but when in 1865 Umtonga fled from Zululand to Natal, Cetshwayo, seeing that he had lost his part of the bargain (for he feared that Umtonga might be used to supplant him, as Mpande had been used to supplant Dingane ), caused the beacon to be removed, and also claimed the land ceded by the Swazi s to Lydenburg. The Zulus asserted that the Swazis were their vassals and therefore had no right to part with this territory. During the year a Boer commando under Paul Kruger and an army under Cetshwayo were posted to defend the newly acquired Utrecht border. The Zulu forces took back their land north of the Pongola. Questions were also raised as to the validity of the documents signed by the Zulus concerning the Utrecht strip; in 1869 the services of the lieutenant-governor of Natal, then Robert William Keate, were accepted by both parties as arbitrator, but the attempt then made to settle disagreements proved unsuccessful. Cetshwayo permitted European missionaries in Zululand however, the activities of the missionaries were unwelcome to Cetshwayo. Though he did not harm, or persecute, the missionaries themselves, several converts were killed. The missionaries, for their part, were a source of hostile reports. { Barthorp, 2002, p. 13. } While numerous Zulus of rival factions fled into Natal and some of the surrounding areas, Cetshwayo continued and maintained the peaceful relations with the Natal colonists that had prevailed for decades. Such was the political background when Cetshwayo became absolute ruler of the Zulus upon his father&apos;s death in 1873. As ruler, Cetshwayo set about reviving the military methods of his uncle Shaka as far as possible, forming new age-set regiments and even succeeded in equipping his regiments with a few antiquated muskets and other outdated firearms. { Barthorp, 2002, p. 15. } Most Zulu warriors were armed with an iklwa (the Zulu refinement of the assegai thrusting spear) and a shield made of cowhide. { History of Warfare&apos;&apos;, By Christon I. Archer University of Nebraska Press, 2002, ISBN 803244231941 } [ Invalid length. ] {, p.462 &quot; They had a national army of twenty-five thousand men equipped with cowhide shields, assegais and clubs. Lock, Ron; Quantrill, Peter (2005). Zulu Victory: The Epic of Isandlwana and the Cover-up. Greenhill Books, ISBN 1-85367-505-9, p.62, John Shepstone, Acting Secretary for Native Affairs at the time on the Zulu army – &quot; Equipment: Each man carries his shield and assegais, and a kaross or blanket if he possesses one, he may also have a war dress of monkey skins or ox tails, this is all. &quot; } The Zulu army drilled in the personal and tactical use and coordination of this weapons system. While some Zulus also had firearms, their marksmanship training was poor and the quality and supply of powder and shot dreadful. { Knight, Ian, Rorke&apos;s Drift 1879, &quot; Pinned Like Rats in a Hole &quot;; Osprey Campaign Series #41, } { Osprey Publishing 1996,ISBN 1-85532-506-3, p.33, 38, 39. } The Zulu attitude towards firearms was that: &quot; The generality of Zulu warriors, however, would not have firearms – the arms of a coward, as they said, for they enable the poltroon to kill the brave without awaiting his attack. &quot; { Bourquin, S.. Military History Journal, V.4, No.4, The Zulu Military Organization, South African Military History Society, ISSN 0026-4016, Dec. 1978. } [ Boundary commission and ultimatum ] The tension between Cetshwayo and the Transvaal over border disputes continued. Sir Theophilus Shepstone, whom Cetshwayo regarded as his friend, had supported him in the border dispute, but in 1877 he led a small force into the Transvaal and persuaded the Boers to give up their independence. Shepstone became administrator of the Transvaal, and in that role saw the border dispute from the other side. { Martineau, J.. Life and Correspondence of Sir Bartle Frere, Vol. ii., Chapter xix, London, 1895, p.251. } Shepstone claimed to have evidence supporting the Boer position but, ultimately, he failed to provide any. In a meeting with Zulu notables at Blood River in October 1877, Shepstone attempted to placate the Zulu with paternal speeches, however they were unconvinced and accused Shepstone of betraying them. Shepstone&apos;s subsequent reports to Carnarvon then began to paint the Zulu as an aggressive threat where he had previously presented Cetshwayo in a most favourable light. { Gump, James O.. The Dust Rose like Smoke: The Subjugation of the Zulu and the Sioux, Bison Books, 1996, ISBN 0-8032-7059-3, pp.87–88. } In February 1878 a commission was appointed by Henry Bulwer, the lieutenant-governor of Natal since 1875, to report on the boundary question. The commission reported in July and found almost entirely in favour of the contention of the Zulu. However, Sir Henry Bartle Frere, then high commissioner and still pressing forward with Carnarvon&apos;s federation plan, characterized the award as &quot; one-sided and unfair to the Boers, &quot; { Martineau, J.. Life and Correspondence of Sir Bartle Frere, Vol. ii., Chapter xix, London, 1895, p.242, much of the chapter gives, without sarcasm- or irony, Bartle Frere&apos;s remarkable rationalizations in undermining the commission&apos;s conclusions. } stipulated that on the land being given to the Zulu, the Boers living on it should be compensated if they left or protected if they remained. In addition, Frere planned to use the meeting on the boundary commission report with the Zulu representatives to also present a surprise ultimatum he had devised that would allow British forces under Lord Chelmsford, which he had previously been instructed to use only in defense against a Zulu invasion of Natal, to instead invade Zululand. Three incidents occurred in late July, August and September which Frere seized upon as his causus belli and were the basis for the ultimatum to which Frere knew Cetshwayo could not comply, { Edward M. Spiers, The Scottish Soldier and Empire, 1854–1902, Edinburgh University Press, 2006, p. 41. ISBN 978-0-7486-2354-9 Also: Ian Knight, Zulu War, Osprey, 2004, p. 9, &quot; By late 1878 Frere had manipulated a diplomatic crisis with the Zulus &quot; } giving Frere a pretext to attack the Zulu kingdom. { F.E. Colenso, History of the Zulu War and Its Origin, London, 1880, pp. 261–262, &quot; the terms  ... are evidently such as he (Cetshwayo) may not improbably refuse, even at the risk of war  ... to preclude you from incurring the delay  ... involved in consulting Her Majesty&apos;s Government upon a subject of so much importance as the terms... &quot; Also: Ian Knight, Zulu War, Osprey, 2004, p. 11, &quot; an ultimatum with which, Frere knew, they could not possibly comply. &quot; } The first two incidents related to the flight into Natal of two wives of Sihayo kaXonga and their subsequent seizure and execution by his brother and sons and were described thus: &quot; A wife of the chief Sihayo had left him and escaped into Natal. She was followed [on 28 July 1878] by a party of Zulus, under Mehlokazulu, the chief son of Sihayo, and his brother, seized at the kraal where she had taken refuge, and carried back to Zululand, where she was put to death, in accordance with Zulu law... &quot; A week later the same young men, with two other brothers and an uncle, captured in like manner another refugee wife of Sihayo, in the company of the young man with whom she had fled. This woman was also carried back, and is supposed to have been put to death likewise; the young man with her although guilty in Zulu eyes of a most heinous crime, punishable with death, was safe from them on English soil; they did not touch him. &quot; Colenso, 1880, p. 196. The third incident occurred in September, when two men were detained while on a sand bank of the Thukela River near the Middle Drift. Sir Bartle Frere described this matter in a despatch to Sir Michael Hicks Beach, who had replaced Carnarvon as Secretary of State for the Colonies: &quot; Mr. Smith, a surveyor in the Colonial Engineer Department, was on duty inspecting the road down to the Tugela, near Fort Buckingham, which had been made a few years ago by order of Sir Garnet Wolseley, and accompanied by Mr. Deighton, a trader, resident at Fort Buckingham, went down to the ford across the Tugela. The stream was very low, and ran under the Zulu bank, but they were on this side of it, and had not crossed when they were surrounded by a body of 15 or 20 armed Zulus, made prisoners, and taken off with their horses, which were on the Natal side of the river, and roughly treated and threatened for some time; though, ultimately, at the instance of a headman who came up, they were released and allowed to depart. &quot; British Parliamentary Papers, C. 2222, No. 111: Frere to Hicks Beach, 6 October 1878. By themselves, these incidents were flimsy grounds upon which to found an invasion of Zululand. Bulwer did not initially hold Cetshwayo responsible for what was clearly not a political act in the seizure and murder of the two women. &quot; I have sent a message to the Zulu King to inform him of this act of violence and outrage by his subjects in Natal territory, and to request him to deliver Up to this Government to be tried for their offence, under the laws of the Colony, the persons of Mehlokazulu and Bekuzulu the two sons of Sirayo who were the leaders of the party. &quot; British Parliamentary Papers, C. 2220, No. 40: Bulwer to Hicks Beach, 9 August 1878. Cetshwayo also treated the complaint rather lightly, responding &quot; Cetywayo is sorry to have to acknowledge that the message brought by Umlungi is true, but he begs his Excellency will not take it in the light he sees the Natal Government seem to do, as what Sirayo’s sons did he can only attribute to a rash act of boys who in the zeal for their father’s house did not think of what they were doing. Cetywayo acknowledges that they deserve punishing, and he sends some of his izinduna, who will follow Umlungi with his words. Cetywayo states that no acts of his subjects will make him quarrel with his fathers of the house of Shaka. &quot; British Parliamentary Papers, C. 2220, Enclosure in No. 89: Cetshwayo to Bulwer, 24 August 1879. The original complaint carried to Cetshwayo from the lieutenant-governor was in the form of a request for the surrender of the culprits. The request was subsequently transformed by Sir Bartle Frere into a &apos;demand&apos;. Frere wrote to Hicks Beach, 30 September 1878: &quot; Apart from whatever may be the general wish of the Zulu nation, it seems to me that the seizure of the two refugee women in British territory by an armed force crossing an unmistakable and well known boundary line, and carrying them off and murdering them with contemptuous disregard for the remonstrances of the Natal policemen, is itself an insult and a violation of British territory which cannot be passed over, and unless apologised and atoned for by compliance with the Lieutenant Governor’s demands, that the leaders of the murderous gangs shall be given up to justice, it will be necessary to send to the Zulu King an ultimatum which must put an end to pacific relations with our neighbours. &quot; British Parliamentary Papers, C. 2220, No. 105, Frere to Hicks Beach, 30 September 1878. In reply, in at least three dispatches, 17 October, 21 November and 18 December, Hicks Beach emphatically states that war is to be avoided and a British invasion of Zululand prohibited. From the 21 November dispatch: &quot;... Her Majesty&apos;s Government have arrived, it is my duty to impress upon you that in supplying these reinforcements it is the desire of Her Majesty&apos;s Government not to furnish means for a campaign of invasion and conquest, but to afford such protection as may be necessary at this juncture to the lives and property of the colonists. Though the present aspect of affairs is menacing in a high degree, I can by no means arrive at the conclusion that war with the Zulus should be unavoidable, and I am confident that you, in concert with Sir H. Bulwer, will use every effort to overcome the existing difficulties by judgment and forbearance, and to avoid an evil so much to be deprecated as a Zulu war. &quot;. Colenso, Frances E.. History of the Zulu War and Its Origin. London: Chapman and Hall., 1880, ISBN 1-152-31729-6 pp. 258–260. Hicks Beach After considerable discussion and exchanges of views between Sir Bartle Frere and Sir Henry Ernest Gascoyne Bulwer, it was decided to arrange a meeting with representatives of the Zulu king. The ostensible reason for this indaba was to present the findings of the long-awaited Boundary Commission to the Zulu people. The occasion was also to be used to present the king with an ultimatum. By the time the ultimatum was presented, the two infractions by Sihayo’s sons and the roughing up of Smith and Deighton were only part of the justification used, as several matters had arisen in the meantime. One of these was Cetshwayo’s apparent breaking of promises he had given to the then Mr Theophilus Shepstone at the king’s &apos;coronation&apos; in 1872. This farcical piece of theatre had been agreed to by Cetshwayo simply to satisfy the wishes of Shepstone and meant nothing to the Zulu people. Indeed, his real Zulu installation had taken place several weeks earlier when he had been acclaimed by his izinduna. { Gump, James O.. The Dust Rose like Smoke: The Subjugation of the Zulu and the Sioux, Bison Books, 1996, ISBN 0-8032-7059-3, Chapter 5, Agents of Empire, p. 79. } A second addition to the ultimatum, which seems almost like an afterthought, required the surrender of Mbelini kaMswati. Mbelini was the son of a Swazi king who unsuccessfully disputed the succession with his brother, resulting in his exile from the kingdom. He took refuge with Cetshwayo and was granted land in the region of the Intombe River in western Zululand. (It is entirely possible that Cetshwayo regarded him as a useful buffer between him and the Boers of the Transvaal.) Here, he took up residence on the Tafelberg, a flat-topped mountain overlooking the river. Something of a brigand, Mbelini made raids on anyone in his area, Boer and Zulu alike, accruing cattle and prisoners in the process. With the annexation of the Transvaal, Britain had also to deal with Mbelini and because Frere was convinced that the bandit chief was in the pay of the Zulu king, his surrender was included in the ultimatum. The light in which Mbelini was regarded is shown in a paragraph from a memorandum written by Sir Henry Bulwer: &quot; The King disowned Umbilini’s acts by saying that Umbilini had been giving him trouble, that he had left the Zulu country in order to wrest the Swazi chieftainship from his brother, the reigning Chief, and that if he returned he should kill him. But there is nothing to show that he has in any way punished him, and, on the contrary, it is quite certain that even if Umbilini did not act with the express orders of Cetywayo, he did so with the knowledge that what he was doing would be agreeable to the King. &quot; British Parliamentary Papers, C. 2260, Enclosure 2 in No. 6: Memorandum, 16 January 1879. Frere has been accused of chicanery by taking deliberate advantage of the length of time it took for correspondence to pass between South Africa and London to conceal his intentions from his political masters or at least defer giving them the necessary information until it was too late for them to act. The first intimation to the British government of his intention to make &apos;demands&apos; on the Zulu was in a private letter to Hicks Beach written on 14 October 1878. The letter only arrived in London on 16 November and by then messengers had already been despatched from Natal to the Zulu king to request the presence of a delegation at the Lower Tugela on 11 December for the purpose of receiving the Boundary Commission’s findings. Had Hicks Beach then sent off a telegraph forbidding any action other than the announcement of the boundary award, it might have arrived in South Africa just in time to prevent the ultimatum being presented. No prohibition was sent and could hardly be expected to have been, for Hicks Beach had no means of knowing the urgency of the events that were in train. Nowhere in Frere’s letter was there anything to indicate how soon he intended to act, nor was there anything to suggest how stringent his demands would be. In January 1879 Hicks Beach wrote to Bartle Frere: &quot; I may observe that the communications which had previously been received from you had not entirely prepared them &quot; (Her Majesty&apos;s Government) &quot; for the course which you have deemed it necessary to take. The representations made by Lord Chelmsford and yourself last autumn as to the urgent need of strengthening Her Majesty&apos;s forces in South Africa were based upon the imminent danger of an invasion of Natal by the Zulus, and the inadequate means at that time at your disposal for meeting it. In order to afford protection to the lives and property of the colonists, the reinforcements asked for were supplied, and, in informing you of the decision of Her Majesty&apos;s Government, I took the opportunity of impressing upon you the importance of using every effort to avoid war. But the terms which you have dictated to the Zulu king, however necessary to relieve the colony in future from an impending and increasing danger, are evidently such as he may not improbably refuse, even at the risk of war; and I regret that the necessity for immediate action should have appeared to you so imperative as to preclude you from incurring the delay which would have been involved in consulting Her Majesty&apos;s Government upon a subject of so much importance as the terms which Cetywayo should be required to accept before those terms were actually presented to the Zulu king. &quot; Colenso, Frances E.. History of the Zulu War and Its Origin. London: Chapman and Hall., 1880, ISBN 1-152-31729-6 pp. 260–262. Hicks Beach had earlier admitted his helplessness with regard to the Frere&apos;s actions in a telling note to his Prime Minister: &quot; I have impressed this [non aggressive] view upon Sir B. Frere, both officially and privately, to the best of my power. But I cannot really control him without a telegraph (I don’t know that I could with one) I feel it is as likely as not that he is at war with the Zulus at the present moment. &quot; Hicks Beach to Lord Beaconsfield, 3 November 1878, quoted by Jeff Guy, in The Destruction of the Zulu Kingdom: the Civil War in Zululand, p. 49 Frere wanted to provoke a conflict with the Zulus and in that goal he succeeded. Cetshwayo rejected the demands of 11 December, by not responding by the end of the year. A concession was granted by Bartle Frere until 11 January 1879, after which Bartle Frere deemed a state of war to exist. The British forces intended for the defense of Natal had already been on the march with the intention to attack the Zulu kingdom. On 10 January they were poised on the border. On 11 January, they crossed the border and invaded Zululand. The terms of the ultimatumThe terms which were included in the ultimatum delivered to the representatives of King Cetshwayo on the banks of the Thukela river on 11 December 1878. No time was specified for compliance with item 4, twenty days were allowed for compliance with items 1–3, that is, until 31 December inclusive; ten days more were allowed for compliance with the remaining demands, items 4–13. The earlier time limits were subsequently altered so that all expired on 10 January 1879. Surrender of Sihayo’s three sons and brother to be tried by the Natal courts. Payment of a fine of five hundred head of cattle for the outrages committed by the above and for Cetshwayo’s delay in complying with the request of the Natal Government for the surrender of the offenders. Payment of a hundred head of cattle for the offence committed against Messrs. Smith and Deighton. Surrender of the Swazi chief Umbilini and others to be named hereafter, to be tried by the Transvaal courts. Observance of the coronation promises. That the Zulu army be disbanded and the men allowed to go home. That the Zulu military system be discontinued and other military regulations adopted, to be decided upon after consultation with the Great Council and British Representatives. That every man, when he comes to man’s estate, shall be free to marry. All missionaries and their converts, who until 1877 lived in Zululand, shall be allowed to return and reoccupy their stations. All such missionaries shall be allowed to teach and any Zulu, if he chooses, shall be free to listen to their teaching. A British Agent shall be allowed to reside in Zululand, who will see that the above provisions are carried out. All disputes in which a missionary or European is concerned, shall be heard by the king in public and in presence of the Resident. No sentence of expulsion from Zululand shall be carried out until it has been approved by the Resident. Martineau, J.. Life and Correspondence of Sir Bartle Frere, Vol. ii., Chapter xix, London, 1895, p.248. For his part, Cetshwayo strenuously attempted to avoid war with the British and, should it occur, limit its scope and effects. He ordered his troops to defend their country only if attacked and not to carry the war beyond its borders. He directed them to avoid killing any of the invaders other than the regular British soldiers in their red coats. [ British invasion and repulse ] [ Battle of Inyezane Battle of Isandlwana Battle of Rorke&apos;s Drift Siege of Eshowe Battle of Intombe Battle of Hlobane Battle of Kambula Battle of Gingindlovu ] Battle of Isandlwana painting by Charles Edwin Fripp (1854–1906) { The pretext for the war had its origins in border disputes between the Zulu leader, } { Cetshwayo, and the } { Boer s in the } { Transvaal region. Following a commission enquiry on the border dispute which reported in favour of the Zulu nation in July 1878, } { Sir Henry Bartle Frere, acting on his own, added an ultimatum to the commission meeting, much to the surprise of the Zulu representatives who then relayed it to Cetshwayo. Cetshwayo had not responded by the end of the year, so an extension was granted by Bartle Frere until 11 January 1879. Cetshwayo returned no answer to the preposterous demands Colenso, pp. 261–262, &quot; the terms...are evidently such as he (Cetshwayo) may not improbably refuse, even at the risk of war... to preclude you from incurring the delay...involved in consulting Her Majesty&apos;s Government upon a subject of so much importance as the terms... &quot; Also: Ian Knight, Zulu War, Osprey, 2004, p. 11, &quot;... an ultimatum with which, Frere knew, they could not possibly comply. &quot; } { of Bartle Frere, and in January 1879 a British force under Lieutenant General } { Frederick Augustus Thesiger, 2nd Baron Chelmsford invaded Zululand, without authorisation by the British Government. } Lord Chelmsford, the Commander-in-Chief of British forces during the war, initially planned a five-pronged invasion of Zululand composed of over 15,000 troops in five columns and designed to encircle the Zulu army and force it to fight as he was concerned that the Zulus would avoid battle. In the event, Lord Chelmsford settled on three invading columns with the main center column, now consisting of some 7800 men comprising the previously called No. 3 Column and Durnford&apos;s No.2 Column, { Colenso, pp. 263–264 gives 7,800: 1752 Imperial and Colonial troops and 6054 Native Contingent and 377 Conductors and Drivers for the Number 2 Column under Durnford and the Number 3 Column under Glynn which made up Chelmsford&apos;s Main Column. The strength of the entire invasion force is given as a total of 16,506 for the five columns: 6,669 Imperial and colonial troops: 9,035 troops in the native contingent; 802 Drivers, etc. } under his direct command. He moved his troops from Pietermaritzburg to a forward camp at Helpmekaar, past Greytown. On 9 January 1879 they moved to Rorke&apos;s Drift, and early on 11 January commenced crossing the Buffalo River into Zululand. [ Hermann Giliomee &amp; Bernard Mbenga New History of South Africa Tafelberg Publishers 2007 First 166 978-0-624-04359-1 ] Three columns were to invade Zululand, from the Lower Tugela, Rorke&apos;s Drift, and Utrecht respectively, their objective being Ulundi, the royal capital. While Cetshwayo&apos;s army numbered perhaps 35,000 men, it was essentially a militia force which could be called out in time of national danger. { Ian Knight, Alan Perry. Rorke&apos;s Drift 1879 Pinned like rats in a hole, Osprey, 1996, ISBN 1-85532-506-3, p.11, &quot; they were a part-time citizen army, and were armed primarily with traditional weapons. &quot; } It had a very limited logistical capacity and could only stay in the field a few weeks before the troops would be obliged to return to their civilian duties. { Ian Knight, Adam Hook, British Fortifications in Zululand 1879, Osprey, 2005, ISBN 1-84176-829-4, p.8 } Zulu warriors were armed primarily with Assegai thrusting spears, known in Zulu as iklwa, clubs, some throwing spears and shields made of cowhide. { History of Warfare&apos;&apos;, By Christon I. Archer University of Nebraska Press, 2002, ISBN 803244231941 } [ Invalid length. ] {, p.462 &quot; They had a national army of twenty-five thousand men equipped with cowhide shields, assegais and clubs. Lock, p.62, John Shepstone, Acting Secretary for Native Affairs at the time on the Zulu army – &quot; Equipment: Each man carries his shield and assegais, and a kaross or blanket if he possesses one, he may also have a war dress of monkey skins or ox tails, this is all. &quot; } The initial entry of all three columns was unopposed. On 22 January the centre column, which had advanced from Rorke&apos;s Drift, was encamped near Isandlwana; on the morning of that day Lord Chelmsford split his forces and moved out to support a reconnoitring party, leaving the camp in charge of Colonel Pulleine. The British were outmanoeuvred by the main Zulu army nearly 20,000 strong led by Ntshingwayo kaMahole Khoza. Chelmsford was lured eastward with much of his centre column by a Zulu diversionary force while the main Impi attacked his camp. Chelmsford&apos;s decision not to set up the British camp defensively, contrary to established doctrine, and ignoring information that the Zulus were close at hand were decisions that the British were soon to regret. The ensuing Battle of Isandlwana was the greatest victory that the Zulu kingdom would enjoy during the war. The British centre column was wrecked and its camp annihilated with heavy casualties as well as the loss of all its supplies, ammunition and transport. The defeat left Chelmsford no choice but to hastily retreat out of Zululand. In the battle&apos;s aftermath, a party of some 4,000 Zulu reserves mounted an unauthorised raid on the nearby British army border post of Rorke&apos;s Drift and were driven off after 10 hours of ferocious fighting. { Charles Edwin Fripp ) } While the British central column under Chelmsford&apos;s command was thus engaged, the right flank column on the coast, under Colonel Charles Pearson, crossed the Tugela River, skirmished with a Zulu impi that was attempting to set up an ambush at the Inyezane River, and advanced as far as the deserted missionary station of Eshowe, which he set about fortifying. On learning of the disaster at Isandlwana, Pearson made plans to withdraw back beyond the Tugeala River. However, before he had decided whether of not to put these plans into effect, the Zulu army managed to cut off his supply lines, and the Siege of Eshowe had begun. Meanwhile the left flank column at Utrecht, under Colonel Evelyn Wood, had originally been charged with occupying the Zulu tribes of north-west Zululand and preventing them from interfering with the British central column&apos;s advance on Ulundi. To this end Wood set up camp at Tinta&apos;s Kraal, just 10 miles south of Hlobane Mountain, where a force of 4,000 Zulus had been spotted. He planned to attack them on the 24 January, but on learning of the disaster at Isandlwana, he decided to withdraw back to the Kraal. Thus one month after the British invasion, only their left flank column remained militarily effective, and it was too weak to conduct a campaign alone. The first invasion of Zululand had been a failure. { Laband, John. Historical dictionary of the Zulu wars, Scarecrow Press, 2009, ISBN 0-8108-6078-3, p.5, &quot; The Anglo-Zulu War is described in terms of the 1st invasion and 2nd invasion. &quot;. } It had never been Cetshwayo&apos;s intention to invade Natal, but to simply fight within the boundaries of the Zulu kingdom. Chelmsford used the next two months to regroup and build a fresh invading force with the initial intention of relieving Pearson at Eshowe. The British government rushed seven regiments of re-inforcements to Natal, along with two artillery batteries. On 12 March, an armed escort of stores marching to Luneberg, was defeated by about 500 Zulus at the Battle of Intombe, the British force suffered 80 killed { Morris, Donald R.; Buthelezi, Mangosuthu, The Washing of the Spears, Da Capo Press, 1998, p.474, gives 80 killed: 62 British soldiers, 3 European conductors and 15 native voorloopers. } and all the stores were lost. The first troops arrived at Durban on 7 March. On the 29th a column, under Lord Chelmsford, consisting of 3,400 British and 2,300 African soldiers, marched to the relief of Eshowe, entrenched camps being formed each night. Chelmsford ordered Sir Evelyn Wood&apos;s troops to attack the abaQulusi Zulu stronghold in Hlobane. Lieutenant Colonel Redvers Buller, led the attack on Hlobane on 28 March. However, as the Zulu main army of 20,000 men approached to help their besieged tribesmen, the British force began a retreat which turned into a rout and were pursued by 1,000 Zulus of the abaQulusi who inflicted some 225 casualties on the British force. The next day 20,000 Zulu warriors { F.E. Colenso, History of the Zulu War and Its Origin, London, 1880, p. 353, &quot; The strength of the enemy was thought to be 20,000 of whom 1000 are supposed to have been killed. &quot;. } attacked Wood&apos;s 2,068 men in a well-fortified camp at Kambula, apparently without Cetshwayo&apos;s permission. The British held them off in the Battle of Kambula and after five hours of heavy attacks the Zulus withdrew. British losses amounted to 80, while the Zulus lost approximately 1,000 killed. { Raugh, Harold E. Jr.. Anglo-Zulu War, 1879: A Selected Bibliography, Scarecrow Press, 2011, ISBN 0-8108-7227-7, p. 5, gives 800 Zulu casualties. } While Woods was thus engaged, Chelmsford&apos;s column was marching on Eshowe. On 2 April this force was attacked en route at Gingindlovu, the Zulu being repulsed. Their losses were heavy, estimated at 1,200 while the British only suffered two dead and 52 wounded. The next day they relieved Pearson&apos;s men. They evacuated Eshowe on 5 April, after which the Zulu forces burned it down. [ Second invasion and the defeat of the Zulus ] [ Battle of Ulundi ] The burning of Ulundi The new start of the larger, heavily reinforced second invasion { Raugh, Harold E. Jr.. Anglo-Zulu War, 1879: A Selected Bibliography, Scarecrow Press, 2011, ISBN 0-8108-7227-7, p. 5, &quot; Chelmsford... began his second invasion... &quot;. Thompson, Paul Singer. Black soldiers of the queen: the Natal native contingent in the Anglo-Zulu War, University of Alabama Press, 2006, ISBN 0-8173-5368-2, p.75 &quot; Thus ended the first British invasion of Zululand. &quot;. Knight, Ian. The Zulu War 1879, Osprey, 2003, ISBN 1-84176-612-7, p. 27 Map titled: &quot; First invasion of Zululand &quot;. Morris, Donald R.; Buthelezi, Mangosuthu. The Washing of the Spears, Da Capo Press, 1998, ISBN 0-306-80866-8, pp. 498–511, Chapter titled: &quot; The Second Invasion &quot;. } was not promising for the British. Despite their successes at Kambula, Gingindlovu and Eshowe, they were right back where they had started from at the beginning of January. Nevertheless, Chelmsford had a pressing reason to proceed with haste – Sir Garnet Wolseley was being sent to replace him, and he wanted to inflict a decisive defeat on Cetshwayo&apos;s forces before then. With yet more reinforcements arriving, soon to total 16,000 British and 7,000 Native troops, Chelmsford reorganised his forces and again advanced into Zululand in June, this time with extreme caution building fortified camps all along the way to prevent any repeat of Isandlwana. One of the early British casualties was the exiled heir to the French throne, Imperial Prince Napoleon Eugene, who had volunteered to serve in the British army and was killed on 1 June while out with a reconnoitering party. Cetshwayo, knowing that the newly reinforced British would be a formidable opponent, attempted to negotiate a peace treaty. Chelmsford was not open to negotiations, as he wished to restore his reputation before Wolseley relieved him of command, and he proceeded to the royal kraal of Ulundi, intending to defeat the main Zulu army. On 4 July the armies clashed at the Battle of Ulundi, and Cetshwayo&apos;s forces were decisively defeated. [ Aftermath ] After the battle of Ulundi the Zulu army dispersed, most of the leading chiefs tendered their submission, and Cetshwayo became a fugitive. Wolseley, having relieved Chelmsford after Ulundi, took over the final operations. On 28 August the king was captured and sent to Cape Town (It is said that scouts spotted the water-carriers of the king, distinctive because the water was carried above, not upon, their heads). His deposition was formally announced to the Zulu. Wolseley wasted no time in discarding Bartle Frere&apos;s confederation scheme and drew up a new scheme which divided Zululand into thirteen chiefdoms headed by compliant chiefs which ensured that the Zulus would no longer unite under a single king and made internal divisions and civil wars inevitable. The dynasty of Shaka was deposed, and the Zulu country portioned among eleven Zulu chiefs, including Usibepu, John Dunn, a white adventurer, and Hlubi, a Basuto chief allied to the British in the war. Chelmsford received a Knight Grand Cross of Bath, largely because of Ulundi, however, he was severely criticized by the Horse Guards investigation { Lock, Ron &amp; Quantrill, Peter Zulu Victory: The Epic of Isandlwana and the Cover-up Jonathan Ball Publishers, Johannesburg &amp; Cape Town, 2002 ISBN 1-86842-214-3, Chapter 9. } and he would never serve in the field again. { Gump, James O.. The Dust Rose like Smoke: The Subjugation of the Zulu and the Sioux, Bison Books, 1996, ISBN 0-8032-7059-3, p.99. } Bartle Frere was relegated to a minor post in Cape Town. Following the conclusion of the Anglo-Zulu War, Bishop Colenso interceded on behalf of Cetshwayo with the British government and succeeded in getting him released from Robben Island and returned to Zululand in 1883. A Resident ( Melmoth Osborn ) was appointed to be the channel of communication between the chiefs and the British government. This arrangement led to much bloodshed and disturbance, and in 1882 the British government determined to restore Cetshwayo to power. In the meantime, however, blood feuds had been engendered between the chiefs Usibepu (Zibebu) and Hamu on the one side and the tribes who supported the ex-king and his family on the other. Cetshwayo&apos;s party (who now became known as the Usuthu) suffered severely at the hands of the two chiefs, who were aided by a band of white freebooters. When Cetshwayo was restored Usibepu was left in possession of his territory, while Dunn&apos;s land and that of the Basuto chief (the country between the Tugela River and the Umhlatuzi, i.e. adjoining Natal) was constituted a reserve, in which locations were to be provided for Zulu unwilling to serve the restored king. This new arrangement proved as futile as had Wolseley&apos;s. Usibepu, having created a formidable force of well-armed and trained warriors, and being left in independence on the borders of Cetshwayo&apos;s territory, viewed with displeasure the re-installation of his former king, and Cetshwayo was desirous of humbling his relative. A collision very soon took place; Usibepu&apos;s forces were victorious, and on the 22 July 1883, led by a troop of mounted Boer mercenary troops, he made a sudden descent upon Cetshwayo&apos;s kraal at Ulundi, which he destroyed, massacring such of the inmates of both sexes as could not save themselves by flight. The king escaped, though wounded, into Nkandla forest. After appeals to Melmoth Osborn he moved to Eshowe, where he died soon after. [ Last veterans ] Colour Sergeant (later Lieutenant-Colonel) Frank Bourne, DCM (1854–1945). Last survivor of Rorke&apos;s Drift. rorkesdriftvc.com – Discussion Forum Private Charles Wallace Warden (died 1953) [ Anglo-Zulu war in film ] { Two film dramatisations of the war are: } { Zulu (1964), which is based on the Battle at Rorke&apos;s Drift, and } { Zulu Dawn (1979), which deals with the Battle of Isandlwana. } [ See also ] First Boer War History of the British Army Colony of Natal Bambatha Rebellion Martini-Henry Military history of South Africa [ References ] [ Bibliography ] [ Barthorp Michael Michael Barthorp The Zulu War: Isandhlwana to Ulundi 2002 Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson 0-304-36270-0 ] [ Brookes Edgar H Webb, Colin de B. A History of Natal University of Natal Press 1965 Brooklyn 0-86980-579-7 ] [ Colenso Frances E. Frances E. Colenso Assisted by Edward Durnford 1880 History of the Zulu War and Its Origin London Chapman &amp; Hall http://www.archive.org/details/historyofzuluwar00colerich ] [ David Saul Saul David The Forgotten Battles of the Zulu War BBC History Magazine 10 2 26–33 February 2009 ] [ Gump James O. James O. Gump The Dust Rose Like Smoke; The Subjugation Of The Zulu And The Sioux Bison Books 1996 0-8032-7059-3. ] [ Knight Ian Ian Knight The Anglo-Zulu War Osprey 2003 1-84176-612-7 ] [ Knight Ian Castle, Ian Ian Knight Zulu War Osprey 2004 1-84176-858-8 ] [ Laband John Knight, Ian The Anglo-Zulu War Sutton 1996 Stroud 0-86985-829-7 ] [ Lock Ron Peter Quantrill Zulu Victory: The Epic of Isandlwana and the Cover-up Jonathan Ball Publishers Johannesburg &amp; Cape Town 2002 1-86842-214-3 ] [ Martineau John The life and correspondence of the Sir Bartle Frere, John Murray 1895 ] [ Morris Donald R. Donald R. Morris The Washing of the Spears Da Capo Press 1998 0-306-80866-8 ] [ Raugh Harold E. Jr. Harold E. Raugh Jr. Anglo-Zulu War 1879: A Selected Bibliography Scarecrow PressPress 2011 0-8108-7227-7 ] [ Thompson Paul Singer Paul Singer Thompson Black soldiers of the queen: the Natal native contingent in the Anglo-Zulu War University of Alabama Press 2006 0-8173-5368-2 ] [ Spiers Edward M. Edward M. Spiers The Scottish Soldier and Empire, 1854–1902 Edinburgh University Press 2006 074862354 ] [ External links ] Rorke&apos;s Drift and the Anglo-Zulu War website Anglo-Zulu War Historical Society The Keynsham Light Horse History of the Anglo-Zulu War by Ian Knight Anglo-Zulu War, 1878–1879 by Ralph Zuljan Category:Military history of South Africa Category:Wars involving the states and peoples of Africa Zulu Category:1879 in South Africa Category:Battles involving the Zulu Category:History of KwaZulu-Natal Category:History of South Africa af:Anglo-Zoeloe-oorlog ar:الحرب الإنجليزية الزولوية bn:অ্যাংলো-জুলু যুদ্ধ ca:Guerra Anglo-Zulu cs:Britsko-zulská válka da:Zulukrigen de:Zulukrieg es:Guerra anglo-zulú eu:Anglo-Zulu Gerra fr:Guerre anglo-zouloue id:Perang Inggris-Zulu it:Guerra anglo-zulu he:מלחמת הזולו lt:Anglų-zulų karas hu:Angol–zulu háború nl:Zoeloe-oorlog ja:ズールー戦争 no:Zulukrigen oc:Guèrra Anglozolo pl:Wojna brytyjsko-zuluska 1879 pt:Guerra Anglo-Zulu ru:Англо-зулусская война sl:Angleško-zulujska vojna fi:Zulu-sota sv:Anglo-zulukriget tr:Zulu Savaşı zh:祖魯戰爭