A scalar field such as temperature or pressure, where intensity of the field is graphically represented by intensity of the color. In mathematics and physics, a scalar field associates a scalar value to every point in a space. The scalar may either be a mathematical number, or a physical quantity. Scalar fields are required to be coordinate-independent, meaning that any two observers using the same units will agree on the value of the scalar field at the same point in space (or spacetime). Examples used in physics include the temperature distribution throughout space, the pressure distribution in a fluid, and spin-zero quantum fields, such as the Higgs field. These fields are the subject of scalar field theory. [ Definition ] Mathematically, a scalar field on a region U is a real or complex-valued function or distribution on U. [ Tom Apostol Tom Apostol Calculus, Volume II Wiley 1969 2nd ] [ Scalar s/s083240 ] The region U may be a set in some Euclidean space, Minkowski space, or more generally a subset of a manifold, and it is typical in mathematics to impose further conditions on the field, such that it be continuous or often continuously differentiable to some order. A scalar field is a tensor field of order zero, [ s/s083260 Scalar field ] and the term &quot; scalar field &quot; may be used to distinguish a function of this kind with a more general tensor field, density, or differential form. Physically, a scalar field is additionally distinguished by having units of measurement associated with it. In this context, a scalar field should also be independent of the coordinate system used to describe the physical system —that is, any two observer s using the same units must agree on the numerical value of a scalar field at any given point of physical space. Scalar fields are contrasted with other physical quantities such as vector field s, which associate a vector to every point of a region, as well as tensor field s and spinor fields. More subtly, scalar fields are often contrasted with pseudoscalar fields. [ Uses in physics ] In physics, scalar fields often describe the potential energy associated with a particular force. The force is a vector field, which can be obtained as the gradient of the potential energy scalar field. Examples include: Potential field s, such as the Newtonian gravitational potential, or the electric potential in electrostatics, are scalar fields which describe the more familiar forces. A temperature, humidity or pressure field, such as those used in meteorology. [ Examples in quantum theory and relativity ] In quantum field theory, a scalar field is associated with spin-0 particles. The scalar field may be real or complex valued. Complex scalar fields represent charged particles. These include the charged Higgs field of the Standard Model, as well as the charged pions mediating the strong nuclear interaction. Technically, pions are actually examples of pseudoscalar mesons, which fail to be invariant under spatial inversion, but are otherwise invariant under Lorentz transformations. In the Standard Model of elementary particles, a scalar Higgs field is used to give the lepton s and massive vector bosons their mass, via a combination of the Yukawa interaction and the spontaneous symmetry breaking. This mechanism is known as the Higgs mechanism. P.W. Higgs; Phys. Rev. Lett. 13(16): 508, Oct. 1964. The Higgs boson is still the subject of searches at particle accelerators. In scalar theories of gravitation scalar fields are used to describe the gravitational field. scalar-tensor theories represent the gravitational interaction through both a tensor and a scalar. Such attempts are for example the Jordan theory P. Jordan Schwerkraft und Weltall, Vieweg (Braunschweig) 1955. as a generalization of the Kaluza-Klein theory and the Brans-Dicke theory. C. Brans and R. Dicke; Phys. Rev. 124(3): 925, 1961. Scalar fields like the Higgs field can be found within scalar-tensor theories, using as scalar field the Higgs field of the Standard Model,. A. Zee; Phys. Rev. Lett. 42(7): 417, 1979. H. Dehnen et al.; Int. J. of Theor. Phys. 31(1): 109&apos;&apos;, 1992. This field interacts gravitatively and Yukawa -like (short-ranged) with the particles that get mass through it. H. Dehnen and H. Frommmert, Int. J. of theor. Phys. 30(7): 987, 1991. Scalar fields are found within superstring theories as dilaton fields, breaking the conformal symmetry of the string, though balancing the quantum anomalies of this tensor. C.H. Brans; &quot; The Roots of scalar-tensor theory &quot;, arXiv:gr-qc/0506063v1, June 2005. Scalar fields are supposed to cause the accelerated expansion of the universe (inflation A. Guth; Phys. Rev. D23: 347, 1981. ), helping to solve the horizon problem and giving an hypothetical reason for the non-vanishing cosmological constant of cosmology. Massless (i.e. long-ranged) scalar fields in this context are known as inflaton s. Massive (i.e. short-ranged) scalar fields are proposed, too, using for example Higgs-like fields (e.g. J.L. Cervantes-Cota and H. Dehnen; Phys. Rev. D51, 395, 1995. ). [ Other kinds of fields ] Vector field s, which associate a vector to every point in space. Some examples of vector field s include the electromagnetic field and the Newtonian gravitational field. Tensor field s, which associate a tensor to every point in space. For example, in general relativity gravitation is associated with a tensor field (in particular, with the Riemann curvature tensor ). In Kaluza-Klein theory, spacetime is extended to five dimensions and its Riemann curvature tensor can be separated out into ordinary four-dimensional gravitation plus an extra set, which is equivalent to Maxwell&apos;s equations for the electromagnetic field, plus an extra scalar field known as the &quot; dilaton &quot;. The dilaton scalar is also found among the massless bosonic fields in string theory. [ See also ] Scalar field theory Vector-valued function [ References ] [ 2 ] Category:Quantum field theory Category:Multivariable calculus ar:حقل سلمي ca:Camp escalar cs:Skalární pole de:Skalarfeld es:Campo escalar eo:Skalara kampo fr:Champ scalaire it:Campo scalare he:שדה סקלרי ka:სკალარული ველი kk:Скаляр өріс lv:Skalārs lauks lt:Skaliarinis laukas hu:Skalártér nl:Scalair veld ja:スカラー場 no:Skalarfelt nn:Skalarfelt pl:Pole skalarne pt:Campo escalar ru:Скалярное поле sq:Fusha skalare sl:Skalarno polje sv:Skalärfält tr:Sayıl alan uk:Скалярне поле ur:عددیہ میدان vi:Trường vô hướng zh:标量场