[ Sexual identity ] [ June 2007 ] A gender identity is one&apos;s private sense of one&apos;s gender. [ Glossary &amp; Terminology of transgender related terms http://freethoughtblogs.com/nataliereed/glossary-and-guide-to-terminology/ ] There are many variations on gender, not just woman and man as described by the gender binary, these include (among others) genderqueer, and third gender. All societies have a set of gender categories that can serve as the basis of the formation of a social identity in relation to other members of society. In most societies, there is a basic division between gender attributes assigned to males and females. In all societies, however, some individuals do not identify with the gender that is assigned to their biological sex. Some societies have so-called third gender categories that can be used as a basis for a gender identity by people who are uncomfortable with the gender that is usually associated with their sex. Other cultures employ processes of surgical or hormonal sex reassignment to bring people&apos;s biological characteristics in line with their gender identity. In other societies, membership of either of the gender categories is open to people regardless of biological sex. It is an open question why the gender identities of some people conform or do not conform to the majority pattern, while others may not identify with any of the given gender categories. Whether these differences are a product of nature or nurture has been a contentious topic in the social and biological sciences. It is still an open question to what extent genetic versus social factors play a role in determining the gender identities of individuals. The term &quot; gender identity &quot; was originally a medical term used to explain sex reassignment surgery to the public, { &quot; The term &apos;gender identity&apos; was used in a press release, November 21, 1966, to announce the new clinic for transsexuals at The Johns Hopkins Hospital. It was disseminated in the media worldwide, and soon entered the vernacular.... gender identity is your own sense or conviction of maleness or femaleness. &quot; } [ Money John John Money 1994 &apos;The concept of gender identity disorder in childhood and adolescence after 39 years&apos; Journal of Sex and Marital Therapy 20 3 163–77 7996589 10.1080/00926239408403428 ] but is also found in psychology, often as core gender identity. {, } { Richard G. Kopf, Edward Nersessian, Textbook of Psychoanalysis, ( } { American Psychiatric Association, 1996), p. 645. } Basic gender identity is usually formed by age three and is extremely difficult to change after that. { &quot; gender identity. &quot; Encyclopædia Britannica Online. 11 Mar. 2011. }. Although the formation of gender identity is not completely understood, many factors have been suggested as influencing its development. Biological factors that may influence gender identity include pre- and post-natal hormone levels and gene regulation. [ Money John John Money 1994 The concept of gender identity disorder in childhood and adolescence after 39 years Journal of Sex and Marital Therapy 20 3 163–77 7996589 10.1080/00926239408403428 ] Social factors which may influence gender identity include gender messages conveyed by family, mass media, and other institutions. [ Essentials of Sociology James M. Henslin Taylor &amp; Francis 2001 65–67, 240 0-536-94185-8 ] One&apos;s gender identity is also influenced by the social learning theory, which assumes that children develop their gender identity through observing and imitating gender-linked behaviors, and then being rewarded or punished for behaving that way. { Myers, David G. (2008). Psychology. New York: Worth. } In some cases, a person&apos;s gender identity may be inconsistent with their biological sex characteristics, resulting in individuals dressing and/or behaving in a way which is perceived by others as being outside cultural gender norms; these gender expressions may be described as gender variant or transgender. [ 10.1300/J485v09n01_04 Blackless Melanie Besser, M., Carr, S., Cohen-Kettenis, P.T., Connolly, P., De Sutter, P., Diamond, M., Di Ceglie, D. (Ch &amp; Adol.), Higashi, Y., Jones, L., Kruijver. F.P.M., Martin, J., Playdon, Z-J., Ralph, D., Reed, T., Reid, R., Reiner, W.G., Swaab, D., Terry, T., Wilson, P., Wylie. K. 2003 Atypical Gender Development – A Review International Journal of Transgenderism 9 29–44 http://www.gires.org.uk/genderdev.php 2008-09-28 ] Self-concept or self-identity has come to mean how a person understands the way others perceive them. Gender identity does not only refer to the placing of a person into the categories male or female, but also includes the concept of interaction with society on a large scale. People who identify as transsexual may strongly desire that other people consider them to belong to a gender opposite of their karyotype; but often are simply trying to modify their bodies and behaviors to match how they feel inside. This may not have anything to do with being either male or female. With the development of gender identity being influenced by so many factors, there can also be many problems associated with gender identity as well. One of the major disorders is Gender Identity Disorder. Gender Identity Disorder is defined by strong, persistent feelings of identification with the opposite gender and discomfort with one&apos;s own assigned sex. { &quot; Gender Identity Disorder | Psychology Today. &quot; Psychology Today: Health, Help, Happiness Find a Therapist. Psychology Today, 24 Oct. 2005. Web. 17 Dec. 2010. &lt; http://www.psychologytoday.com/conditions/gender-identity-disorder &gt;. } The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (302.85) has five criteria that must be met before a diagnosis of gender identity disorder (GID) can be made. &quot; In gender identity disorder, there is discordance between the natal sex of one&apos;s external genitalia and the brain coding of one&apos;s gender as masculine or feminine. &quot; The term &quot; Gender Identity Disorder &quot; is in and of itself an incredibly divisive issue. Many people including medical professionals, caregivers, scholars, researchers, students, human rights advocates, and members of the queer community advocate reform of the psychiatric classification of gender diversity as a mental disorder. They believe that this classification reinforces false, negative stereotypes of gender variant people and at the same time fails to legitimize the medical necessity of sex reassignment surgeries (SRS) and procedures for transsexual women and men who urgently need them. As a result, a widening segment of gender non-conforming youth and adults who are subject to the diagnosis of psychosexual disorder, are at risk of experiencing social stigma and loss of civil liberty. [ Gender identity—below the surface ] [ October 2010 ] Many people consider themselves to be cisgender, that is, belonging to either the man or woman gender corresponding to their assigned at birth sex of male or female. Before the 20th century a person&apos;s sex would be determined entirely by the appearance of the genitalia, but as chromosome s and gene s came to be understood, these were then used to help determine sex. Those defined as women, by sex, have genitalia that is considered female as well as two X chromosomes; those viewed as men, by sex, are seen as having male genitalia, one X and one Y chromosome. However, some individuals have a combination of these chromosomes, hormones, and genitalia that do not follow the traditional definitions of &quot; men &quot; and &quot; women &quot;. In addition, genitalia vary greatly or individuals may have more than one type of genitalia. Also, other bodily attributes related to a person&apos;s sex (body shape, facial hair, high or deep voice, etc.) may or may not coincide with the social category, as woman or man. A survey of the research literature from 1955–2000 suggests that as many as one in every hundred individuals may have some intersex characteristic. [ Blackless Melanie Anthony Charuvastra, Amanda Derryck, Anne Fausto-Sterling, Karl Lauzanne, and Ellen Lee 2000 February How sexually dimorphic are we? Review and synthesis American Journal of Human Biology 12 2 151–166 11534012 10.1002/(SICI)1520-6300(200003/04)12:2 &lt; 151::AID-AJHB1 &gt; 3.0.CO;2-F http://bms.brown.edu/faculty/f/afs/dimorphic.pdf 2007-02-15 ] Intersex phenomena are not unique to humans. In a number of species, even more striking examples exist, for instance the bilateral gynandromorph ic zebra finch (half-male, half-female body along its symmetry plane). { Arnold, A. P. Sex chromosomes and brain gender. Nature Rev. Neurosci. 5, 701–708 (2004) } { Agate, R. J. et al. Neural not gonadal origin of brain sex differences in a gynandromorphic finch. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 100, 4873–4878 (2003). } Transsexual self-identified people sometimes wish to undergo physical surgery to refashion their primary sexual characteristics, secondary characteristics, or both. This may involve removal of penis, testicles or breasts, or the fashioning of a penis, vagina or breasts. Historically, such surgery has been performed on infants who are born with ambiguous genitalia. However, current medical opinion is broadly against genital assignment, shaped to a significant extent by the mature feedback of adults who regret these decisions being made on their behalf at their birth. Gender reassignment surgery elected by adults is also subject to several kinds of debate. One discussion involves the legal sex-gender status of transgender people, for marriage, retirement and insurance purposes, for example. Another involves whether such surgery is ethically sound. [ August 2009 ] The most easily understood case in which it becomes necessary to distinguish between sex and gender is that in which the external genitalia are removed—when such a thing happens through an accident or through deliberate intent, the libido and the ability to express oneself in sexual activity are changed, but the individual&apos;s gender identity may or may not change. One such case is that of David Reimer, reported in As Nature Made Him by John Colapinto. It details the persistence of a male gender identity and the stubborn adherence to a male gender role of a person whose penis had been totally destroyed shortly after birth as the result of a botched male circumcision, and who had subsequently been surgically reassigned by constructing female genitalia. { MacDonald, Kevin. &quot; Psychology 361 – Gender Roles and Gender Differences. &quot; California State University, Long Beach. Department of Psychology, CSU – Long Beach. Web. 17 Dec. 2010. &lt; http://csulb.edu/~kmacd/361SEX.html &gt;. } In other cases, a person&apos;s gender identity may contrast sharply with that assigned to them according to their genitalia, and/or a person&apos;s gendered appearance as a woman or man (or an androgynous person, etc.) in public may not coincide with their physical sex. So the term &quot; gender identity &quot; is broader than the sex of the individual, as determined by examination of the external genitalia, but also includes the sex or gender one identifies with mentally. [ History ] [ Conceptual origins ] In 1905, Sigmund Freud presented his theory of psychosexual development in Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality. Freud believed gender identity developed during the phallic stage of development. According to Freud, during this stage, young boys develop an Oedipus complex where they have an unconscious sexual desire for their mother and jealousy or hatred for their father. That jealousy turns into emulation as the child seeks to be like their father, eventually identifying with him. In 1913, Carl Jung proposed the Electra complex as an analogous phenomenon in girls. This proposal, however, was rejected by Freud. { Freud, Sigmund (1931), &quot; Female Sexuality &quot;, The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud, volume 21, p. 229. } During the 1950s and &apos;60s, psychologists began studying gender development in young children, partially in an effort to understand the origins of homosexuality (which was viewed as a mental disorder at the time). In 1958, the Gender Identity Research Project was established at the UCLA Medical Center for the study of intersexuals and transsexuals. Psychoanalyst Robert Stoller generalized many of the findings of the project in his book Sex and Gender: On the Development of Masculinity and Femininity (1968). He is also credited with introducing the term gender identity to the International Psychoanalytic Congress in Stockholm, Sweden in 1963. Behavioral psychologist John Money was also instrumental in the development of early theories of gender identity. His work at Johns Hopkins Medical School &apos;s Gender Identity Clinic (established in 1965) popularized an interactionist theory of gender identity, suggesting that, up to a certain age, gender identity is relatively fluid and subject to constant negotiation. His book Man and Woman, Boy and Girl (1972) became widely used as a college textbook, although many of Money&apos;s ideas have since been challenged. [ Haraway Donna Donna Haraway 1991 Simians, Cyborgs, and Women: The Reinvention of Nature 133 Free Association Books London 0-415-90386-6 ] [ In the DSM ] [ gender identity disorder ] [ brief summary of controversy October 2010 ] The notion of gender identity appeared in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders in its third edition, DSM-III (1980), in the form of two psychiatric diagnoses of gender dysphoria : gender identity disorder of childhood (GIDC), and transsexualism (for adolescents and adults). The 1987 revision of the manual, the DSM-III-R added a third diagnosis: gender identity disorder of adolescence and adulthood, nontranssexual type. This latter diagnosis was removed in the subsequent revision, DSM-IV (1994), which also collapsed the GIDC and transsexualism in a new diagnosis of gender identity disorder. { Zucker KJ, Spitzer RL, 2005, &quot; Was the gender identity disorder of childhood diagnosis introduced into DSM-III as a backdoor maneuver to replace homosexuality? A historical note. &quot; Journal of Sex and Marital Therapy 2005 Jan–Feb;31(1):31–42 } The conceptualization of sex-gender mismatch as a mental disorder is controversial. [ International Human Rights Law ] The Yogyakarta Principles, which is a document on application of international human rights law, provides definition on gender identity. In the preamble, &quot; gender identity &quot; is understood to refer to each person&apos;s deeply felt internal and individual experience of gender, which may or may not correspond with the sex assigned at birth, including the person&apos;s sense of the body (which may involve, if freely chosen, modification of bodily appearance or function by medical, surgical or other means) and other experience of gender, including dress, speech and mannerism. Further, in Principle 3, that each person&apos;s self-defined gender identity is integral to their personality and is one of the most basic aspects of self-determination, dignity and Freedom. These Principles influenced the UN declaration on sexual orientation and gender identity. [ Gender identity and sex ] [ October 2010 ] When the gender identity of a person makes them one gender, but their genitals suggest a different sex, they will likely experience what is called gender dysphoria. { http://www.genderdysphoria.org/genderdysphoria_medical.html } Some people do not believe that their gender identity corresponds to their assigned at birth sex, including transsexual people, transgender people, and many intersex ed individuals. Consequently, complications arise when society insists that an individual adopt a manner of social expression ( gender role ) which is based on sex, that the individual feels is inconsistent with that person&apos;s gender identity. Complications can also arise with the stereotyping, or gender typing of behavior for individuals for behavior related to a specific sex, when they identify as a different gender. This dissonance can lead to gender identity disorder. One reason for such discordances in intersexed people is that some individuals have a chromosomal sex that has not been expressed in the external genitalia because of hormonal or due to other abnormal conditions during critical periods in gestation. Such a person may appear to others to be of one sex, but may recognize himself or herself as belonging to the other sex [ August 2009 ]. The causes of transgender ism are less clear; it has been subject of much speculation, but no psychological theory has ever been proven to apply to even a significant minority of transgender individuals, and theories that assume a sex difference in the brain are relatively new and difficult to prove, because at the moment they require a destructive analysis of inner brain structures, which are quite small. In recent decades it has become possible to surgically reassign sex. A person who experiences gender dysphoria may then seek these forms of medical intervention to have their physiological sex match their gender identity. Alternatively, some people who experience gender dysphoria retain the genitalia that they were born with (see transsexual for some of the possible reasons), but adopt a gender role that is consistent with what they perceive as their gender identity. There is an emerging vocabulary for those who defy traditional gender identity; see Transgender and Genderqueer. { BBC News Toronto couple defend move to keep baby&apos;s sex secret } [ Biological causes of transsexuality ] Studies of gonads, genitalia, and hormone levels in gender dysphoric persons have not been able to propose any biological explanations for why some persons experience gender dysphoria. One study of the brains of six transsexual male to female individuals have shown a correlation between the size of the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis (BSTc) and gender dysphoria. The BSTc is normally 2.5 times larger in men than in women, but the average among the male-to-female transsexuals was only 52% of the reference non-transsexual males, which lies within the normal female range. [ 10.1038/378068a0 Zhou J.N. et al. Hofman 1995 MA Gooren LJ Swaab DF A sex difference in the human brain and its relation to transsexuality Nature 378 6552 68–70 7477289 ] Another study of the same group found that the number of somatostatin neurons in male-to-female transsexuals was also closer to the normal female range than to that of males, and one female-to-male transsexual was shown to have a neuron number within the normal male range. [ 10.1210/jc.85.5.2034 Kruijver F.P. et al. 2000 Zhou JN Pool CW Hofman MA Gooren LJ Swaab DF Male-to-female transsexuals have female neuron numbers in a limbic nucleus J Clin Endocrinol Metab 85 5 2034–41 10843193 ] [ Nature vs. Nurture ] The extent to which gender identity and gender-specific behavior is determined by socialization versus in-born factors is an ongoing debate in psychology. While gender roles and sex differences are both largely recognized as influential in behavior, it is often difficult to determine the separate impacts of socialization and genetic variables. One study conducted by Reiner &amp; Gearhart provides some insight into what can happen when a child is genetically one sex and is raised as the opposite gender. In a sample of 14 children born with cloacal exstrophy and reassigned female at birth, follow-up between the ages of 5 to 12 showed that 8 of them identified as boys, and all of the subjects had at least moderately male-typical attitudes and interests. [ http://www.isna.org/node/564 Reiner &amp; Gearhart&apos;s NEJM Study on Cloacal Exstrophy – Review by Vernon Rosario, M.D., Ph.D. ] This provides some support for the argument that biological variables have an impact on gender identity and behavior independent of socialization. Furthermore, evidence suggests that differences in verbal and spatial abilities, memory and aggression are linked to differences in hormone secretions between males and females { I.V. Estabrooke, K. Mordecai, P. Maki, M.T. Ullman, The effect of sex hormones on language processing, Brain Lang. 83 (2002) 143–146. } { R.H. Fitch, P.E. Cowell, L.M. Schrott, V.H. Denenberg, Corpus callosum: ovarian hormones and feminization, Brain Res. 542 (1991) 313–317. } { D.W. Pfaff, Hormones, Brain, and Behavior, Academic Press, Amsterdam,Boston, 2002. }. One study claims that gender identity may be influenced by “hormonal imprinting” before birth, so that prenatal androgenization for example (exposure to high levels of androgen before birth) may lead to more masculine behavior { L. Gooren. The biology of human psychosexual differentiation. Hormones and Behavior 50:4(2006). 589-601. }. Importantly, however, prenatal androgenization has not been found to lead necessarily to male gender identity development. A recent study moves beyond hormones to examine so-called “direct effects” of genes located on the X and Y chromosomes. Mediated by brain functioning, these genes are linked to aggression, impulsivity, play behavior and language skills { T.C. Ngun, N. Ghahramani, F.J. Sanchez. The genetics of sex differences in brain and behavior. Frontiers in Neuroendrocrinology 32:2(SI) (2001). 227-246. }. Some studies have tried to establish a link between biological variables and transgender or transsexual identity, but such studies have been limited and their findings largely uncertain { E. Vilain, Genetics of intersexuality, J. Gay Lesbian Psychother. 10 (2006) 9–26. } { A. Fleming, E. Vilain, The endless quest for sex determination genes, Clin.Genet. 67 (2005) 15–25. }. Zhou et al. suggested in 1995 that a sex difference in the central subdivision | bed nucleus of the stria terminalis (BSTc) may serve as a biological marker for gender identity, as the volume of BSTc is larger in males than in either females or male-to-female (MtF) transsexual women { J.N. Zhou, M.A. Hofman, L.J. Gooren, D.F. Swaab, A sex difference in the human brain and its relation to transsexuality, Nature 378 (1995) 68–70. }. However, the presence of confounding variables such as estrogen exposure somewhat complicates the findings. [ Non-Western gender identities ] [ Third gender Two-Spirit ] [ Fa&apos;afafine ] In some Polynesian societies, fa&apos;afafine are considered to be a &quot; third gender &quot; alongside male and female. They are biologically male, but dress and behave in a manner considered typically female. According to Tamasailau Sua&apos;ali&apos;i (see references), fa&apos;afafine in Samoa at least are often physiologically unable to reproduce. Fa&apos;afafine are accepted as a natural gender, and neither looked down upon nor discriminated against. { SUA&apos;ALI&apos;I, Tamasailau, &quot; } { Samoa ns and } { Gender : Some Reflections on Male, Female and Fa&apos;afafine Gender Identities &quot;, in: Tangata O Te Moana Nui: The Evolving Identities of Pacific Peoples in } { Aotearoa / } { New Zealand, Palmerston North (NZ): Dunmore Press, 2001, ISBN 0-86469-369-9 } Fa&apos;afafine also reinforce their femininity with the fact that they are only attracted to and receive sexual attention from straight masculine men. They have been and generally still are initially identified in terms of labour preferences, as they perform typically feminine household tasks. [ Schmidt Johanna Paradise Lost? Social Change and Fa&apos;afafine in Samoa Current Sociology 2003 2003 may 51 417-432 ] The Samoan Prime Minister is patron of the Samoa Fa&apos;afafine Association. [ http://www.stuff.co.nz/world/south-pacific/5233232/Transsexuals-hailed-by-Samoan-PM Transsexuals hailed by Samoan PM Field, Michael 5 July 2011 Stuff.co.nz 1 October 2011 ] [ Hijra ] In the culture of the Indian subcontinent, a hijra is usually considered to be neither a man nor a woman. Most are biologically male or intersex, but some are biologically female. The hijra form a third gender, although they do not enjoy the same acceptance and respect as males and females in their cultures. They can run their own households, and their occupations are singing and dancing, working as cooks or servants, sometimes prostitute s (for men), or long-term sexual partners for men. Hijras can be compared to transvestites or drag queen s of contemporary western culture. { LORBER, Judith. Paradoxes of Gender. Yale University Press:Yale, 1994. pp. 92–93. } [ Xanith ] The xanith form an accepted third gender in Oman, a gender-segregated society. The xanith are male homosexual prostitute s whose dressing is male, featuring pastel colors (rather than white, worn by men), but their mannerisms female. Xanith can mingle with women, and they often do at wedding s or other formal events. Xaniths have their own households, performing all tasks (both male and female). However, similarly to men in their society, xaniths can marry women, proving their masculinity by consummating the marriage. Should a divorce or death take place, these men can revert to their status as xaniths at the next wedding. { LORBER, Judith. Paradoxes of Gender. Yale University Press:Yale, 1994. pp. 94–95. } [ See also ] Gender bias Gender binary Gender differences Sex/gender distinction Queer theory Queer studies Masculinity Femininity Intersexuality Identity (social science) List of transgender-related topics [ References ] [ 2 ] [ External links ] &quot; gender identity. &quot; Encyclopædia Britannica Online Dr. Money And The Boy With No Penis International Foundation for Gender Education National Center for Transgender Equality National Transgender Advocacy Coalition Gender PAC Gender Spectrum Transgender Law Center Gender Issues - Human Rights Human Rights Campaign Foundation, Transgender Resources for the Workplace World Professional Association for Transgender Health Genderology Directory Project, International listing of service providers for those affected by GID Gender Identity Research and Education Society (GIRES), British Charity encouraging and reporting on research into gender variance Gender Anarchy Project TransFemmeButch A forum and discussion board for transmen, femmes, and butches Category:Gender Category:Gender studies Category:Identity Category:Self { bg:Полова идентичност } br:Stad-den revel ca:Identitat de gènere cs:Genderová identita da:Kønsidentitet de:Geschlechtsidentität et:Sooidentiteet es:Identidad de género eo:Socia sekso fr:Identité sexuelle hr:Rodni identitet it:Identità di genere he:זהות מגדרית kk:Гендерлік сәйкестік la:Identitas generis nl:Gender (sekse) ja:性同一性 pl:Tożsamość płciowa pt:Identidade de gênero ro:Identitate de gen ru:Гендерная идентичность simple:Gender identity sr:Родни идентитет sh:Rodni identitet sv:Könsidentitet tl:Katauhang pangkasarian uk:Гендерна ідентичність vi:Nhận thực giới tính zh:性別認同