This article is about the record label. For the Johnny Cash album released by that same label, see American Recordings (album) [ January 2010 ] [ Image:American_Recordings.jpg Sony Music Entertainment 1988 Rick Rubin Sony Music Entertainment Various US Los Angeles, CA ] American Recordings is a Los Angeles -based record label headed by record producer Rick Rubin. Formerly known as Def American Recordings (usually simplified as Def American), some of the label&apos;s roster consist or consisted of Slayer, the Black Crowes, ZZ Top, Danzig, Trouble, Tom Petty, Johnny Cash, and System of a Down. [ Company history ] The label was founded as Def American Recordings after Rick Rubin left Def Jam Recordings in 1988. Among the first acts to be signed were Slayer (which followed Rubin from Def Jam), Danzig, The Four Horsemen, Masters of Reality, and Wolfsbane, as well as indie rockers The Jesus and Mary Chain and controversial stand-up comedian Andrew Dice Clay. Rubin continued his association with hip-hop music by signing artists such as the Geto Boys and Sir Mix-a-Lot. American had its first major success with The Black Crowes &apos; 1990 debut album, Shake Your Money Maker, which was eventually certified quintuple platinum by the RIAA. The group’s 1992 follow-up, The Southern Harmony and Musical Companion, gave American Recordings its first No.1 album. Emcee Sir Mix-a-Lot managed a number-one hit with the song &quot; Baby Got Back &quot; as well as a platinum-selling album titled Mack Daddy. Heavy metal acts Slayer and Danzig also enjoyed notable commercial success, with Slayer in particular, managing several Gold-certified albums. Rubin produces many of the recordings on the label, as well as directing other music-related ventures. Rubin changed the name of the company to American Recordings in 1993 after seeing the word “def” in a dictionary. The company was renamed because he believed that finding the word in a notable source was against the anti-establishment image that he was trying to project for the company. A mock funeral presided over by the Reverend Al Sharpton was done for the label name change. American had several sub-labels over the years, including Onion Records, Ill Labels, Wild West, Whte Lbls [ sic ], and Infinite Zero. The latter was a partnership with Henry Rollins that specialized in reissues of obscure albums. None of these labels made the distribution transition after American Recordings left Warner Bros. Records in 1997, and its recordings were deleted. [ Distribution ] The first-ever Def American release was Reign in Blood by Slayer, which had a Def Jam logo on its first pressing. A Def Jam Recordings logo was also present on its follow-up album. However, because Russell Simmons felt that Slayer&apos;s music was not in line with Def Jam, and because Def Jam’s then-distributor, Columbia/CBS Records, refused to release it, it was released through Geffen Records, and Rubin took the rights of the release to the new label with him after the split. Danzig&apos;s 1988 debut album was the first release to actually bear the Def American logo. Initially, the label was distributed by Geffen Records through Warner Bros. Records, but when Geffen refused to distribute the self-titled album by the Geto Boys and the controversy it caused, distribution was absorbed by Warner Bros. proper, which released all subsequent Def American titles. American&apos;s distribution has been handled through several labels over the years. American&apos;s first incarnation was distributed by Geffen Records through Warner Bros. Records from 1988 to 1990. After a falling out with Geffen over the content of the Geto Boys&apos; only Def American release, Warner Bros. itself took over distribution duties from 1990 to 1997. However, sub-label Ill Labels was distributed by hip-hop specialist and former Warner Bros. subsidiary Tommy Boy Records as part of its deal. For a brief time during the 1990s, the label also distributed Too Pure Records in the USA. Rubin signed a distribution deal with Columbia / SME Records in 1997, which distributed the label&apos;s titles until 2001. That year, Universal Music Group (ironically, the owners of Geffen Records at that point), through its Island Def Jam Music Group division, took over distribution. In 2005, with the exception of the recordings of Johnny Cash, the label returned to the aegis of Warner Bros. Records. Non-US distribution was handled by BMG until the deal with Columbia Records. In 2007, Warner Bros. Records, which was American&apos;s home from 1992 to 1997, acquired the rights to the extensive American Recordings catalog, which included Johnny Cash, The Black Crowes, The Jayhawks, Slayer, and Danzig. However, American&apos;s current roster (except Tom Petty ) was transferred to BMG successor Sony BMG (now Sony Music Entertainment ) in mid-2007 after a legal battle between Warner and Rubin over the details of their former arrangement, in which American Recordings would sign and provide creative services for artists, while Warner Bros. was only to handle promotion, sales, marketing, and distribution because Rubin was prompted to move his label with his appointment to co-chairman of Columbia Records in the Spring of 2007. [ Current artists ] The Avett Brothers Howlin Rain The (International) Noise Conspiracy Gogol Bordello Dan Wilson ZZ Top [ Former artists ] [ June 2011 ] Jazz Lee Alston (Rhyme Cartel/American) American Head Charge Dan Baird Barkmarket Frank Black The Black Crowes Blackeyed Susans Johnny Cash Chino XL Andrew &quot; Dice &quot; Clay Julian Cope Danzig Deconstruction Digital Orgasm (Whte Lbls/American) DJ Kool Donovan Pete Droge Electric Company (Onion/American) Fireside Flipper The Four Horsemen The Freewheelers John Frusciante Geto Boys God Lives Underwater The Jayhawks The Jesus and Mary Chain Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan Kinfolk Kwest tha Madd Ladd Laika Lords of Acid (Whte Lbls/American) Lordz of Brooklyn (Ventrue/American) Loudermilk Love and Rockets Luna Halo Manmade God Masters of Reality MC 900 Ft. Jesus Medicine Messiah (Whte Lbls/American) Milk The Mother Hips Mouse on Mars (Too Pure/American) Noise Ratchet The Nonce (Wild West/American) Ours Paloalto Tom Petty Jonny Polonsky Pram Pretty Tone Capone (Ill Labels/American) Psychotica Raging Slab The Jim Rose Circus Sideshow Ruth Ruth Sir Mix-a-Lot (Rhyme Cartel/American) Skinny Puppy Slayer Stiffs, Inc. Supreme Love Gods Survival Research Laboratories Swell System of a Down Thee Hypnotics Th&apos; Faith Healers Thomas Jefferson Slave Apartments Trouble Unida Vell Bakardy Vitro V.3 Saul Williams Wesley Willis Wolfsbane [ Soundtracks ] Big Daddy Chef Aid: The South Park Album The Doom Generation Jackass: The Movie [ Infinite Zero Reissue Artists ] James Chance And The Contortions Devo Flipper Gang of Four Louise Huebner Iceberg Slim Mississippi Fred McDowell The Monks Matthew Shipp Trouble Funk Alan Vega Tom Verlaine Alan Watts James White and the Blacks [ See also ] List of record labels Category: Infinite Zero albums [ External links ] [ f5be9cfe-e1af-405c-a074-caeaed6797c0 ] Official Web site Category:Record labels established in 1988 Category:American record labels Category:Alternative rock record labels Category:Rock record labels Category:Hip hop record labels da:American Recordings de:American Recordings (Label) es:American Recordings gl:American Recordings hr:American Recordings it:American Recordings pl:American Recordings pt:American Recordings ru:American Recordings fi:American Recordings sv:American Recordings uk:American Recordings