[ March 2009 ] { W16 petrol engine of the } { Bugatti Veyron } [ Internal combustion engine ] A petrol engine (known as a gasoline engine in North America ) is an internal combustion engine with spark-ignition, designed to run on petrol ( gasoline ) and similar volatile fuels and it was made in 1876 in europe. In most petrol engines, the fuel and air are usually pre-mixed before compression (although some modern petrol engines now use cylinder-direct petrol injection). The pre-mixing was formerly done in a carburetor, but now it is done by electronically controlled fuel injection, except in small engines where the cost/complication of electronics does not justify the added engine efficiency. The process differs from a diesel engine in the method of mixing the fuel and air, and in using spark plug s to initiate the combustion process. In a diesel engine, only air is compressed (and therefore heated), and the fuel is injected into very hot air at the end of the compression stroke, and self-ignites. With both air and fuel in a closed cylinder, compressing the mixture too much poses the danger of auto-ignition — or behaving like a diesel engine. Because of the difference in burn rates between the two different fuels, petrol engines are mechanically designed with different timing than diesels, so to auto-ignite a petrol engine causes the expansion of gas inside the cylinder to reach its greatest point before the cylinder has reached the &quot; top dead center &quot; (TDC) position. A typical spark ignition occurs just a few degrees of crankshaft rotation before the piston reaches TDC, which allows time for the gas to begin to expand. Then the bulk of the expansion occurs just after the piston has rotated beyond TDC. Higher octane petrol burns slower, therefore it has a lower propensity to auto-ignite and its rate of expansion is lower. Thus, engines designed to run high-octane fuel exclusively can achieve higher compression ratios. Petrol engines run at higher speeds than diesels, partially due to their lighter pistons, connecting rods and crankshaft (a design efficiency made possible by lower compression ratios) and due to petrol burning faster than diesel. However the lower compression ratios of a petrol engine give a lower efficiency than a diesel engine. To give an example, a petrol engine is like operating a bicycle in its lowest gear where each push from your feet adds little energy to the system, but you still expend energy to move your legs back to the TDC position. A diesel engine is like operating that same bicycle in its highest gear, where each push imparts substantially more energy to the system than in the lower gear, but with the same effort being used to move your legs back to TDC. [ Applications ] Petrol engines have many applications, including: Motor cars Motorcycle s Aircraft Motorboat s Small engine s, such as lawn mower s, chainsaw s and portable engine-generator s [ Design ] [ Working cycles ] 4-Stroke Petrol engine Petrol engines may run on the four-stroke cycle or the two-stroke cycle. For details of working cycles see: Four-stroke cycle Two-stroke cycle Wankel engine [ Cylinder arrangement ] Common cylinder arrangements are from 1 to 6 cylinders in-line or from 2 to 16 cylinders in V-formation. Flat engines – like a V design flattened out – are common in small airplanes and motorcycles and were a hallmark of Volkswagen automobiles into the 1990s. Flat 6s are still used in many modern Porsches, as well as Subarus. Many flat engines are air-cooled. Less common, but notable in vehicles designed for high speeds is the W formation, similar to having 2 V engines side by side. Alternatives include rotary and radial engine s the latter typically have 7 or 9 cylinders in a single ring, or 10 or 14 cylinders in two rings. [ Cooling ] Petrol engines may be air-cooled, with fins (to increase the surface area on the cylinders and cylinder head ); or liquid-cooled, by a water jacket and radiator. The coolant was formerly water, but is now usually a mixture of water and either ethylene glycol or propylene glycol. These mixtures have lower freezing points and higher boiling points than pure water and also prevent corrosion, with modern antifreezes also containing lubricants and other additives to protect water pump seals and bearings. The cooling system is usually slightly pressurized to further raise the boiling point of the coolant. [ Compression ratio ] The compression ratio is the ratio between the total volumes of the cylinder AND the combustion chambers – at the beginning, and end of the compression stroke. Broadly speaking, the higher the compression ratio, the higher the efficiency of the engine. However, compression ratio has to be limited to avoid pre-ignition of the fuel-air mixture which would cause engine knocking and damage to the engine. Modern motor-car engine overall have compression ratios of between 9:1 and 10:1, but this can go up to 11 or 12:1 for high-performance engines that run on higher octane fuel [ Ignition ] [ Ignition system ] Petrol engines use spark ignition and high voltage current for the spark may be provided by a magneto or an ignition coil. In modern car engines the ignition timing is managed by an electronic Engine Control Unit. [ See also ] gasoline direct injection Category:Internal combustion piston engines Category:Petroleum Category:Gasoline engines [ fr ] ar:محرك بنزين ca:Motor de gasolina cs:Zážehový motor da:Ottomotor de:Ottomotor fr:Moteur à allumage commandé hr:Benzinski motor id:Mesin bensin he:מנוע בנזין mr:पेट्रोल इंजिन ms:Enjin petrol nl:Benzinemotor ja:ガソリンエンジン no:Bensinmotor nn:Bensinmotor pl:Silnik o zapłonie iskrowym pnb:پٹرول انجن ru:Бензиновый двигатель внутреннего сгорания sk:Zážihový motor sl:Ottov motor fi:Ottomoottori sv:Ottomotor tr:Benzinli motor uk:Бензиновий двигун vi:Động cơ xăng vls:Naftemoteur zh:火花點火