{ Asdreni } { 1912 } { Ciprian Porumbescu } { 1912 } { Hymni i Flamurit instrumental.ogg } { Hymni i Flamurit (instrument) } Himni i Flamurit (in English : Hymn to the Flag) is the national anthem of Albania. The words were written by the Albanian poet Asdreni (Aleksandër Stavre Drenova) but are merely different from the original romanian lyrics which Andrei Barseanu wrote for Porumbescu&apos;s piece. The hymn was first published as a poem in Liri e Shqipërisë (in English: Freedom of Albania), an Albanian newspaper in Sofia, Bulgaria, on April 21, 1912. It was later printed in a volume of poems by Drenova titled Ëndra e lotë (in English: Dreams and tears), which was published in Bucharest. The music of the anthem was composed by the Romanian composer Ciprian Porumbescu, originally for the song &quot; Pe-al nostru steag e scris Unire &quot; (or &quot; E scris pe tricolor unire &quot; ). { Himni kombëtar } [ Lyrics and translation ] There are two versions of the anthem: a long and a short one. Below is the text for the long version. The second stanza is considered as refrain and is repeated at the end. The short version makes use of the first two stanzas only and repeats the last two verses of the 2nd stanza. Usually, in sportive events among national teams, the short version is the one officially used. (The original poem has three more stanzas that are not part of the anthem – which are added at the end.) Albanian lyrics Translation First stanza Rreth flamurit të përbashkuar Me një dëshir&apos; e një qëllim, Të gjith&apos; atij duke iu betuar Të lidhim besën për shpëtim. Around our flag we stand united, With one wish and one goal, A sacred oath we bestow upon it Proclaiming loyalty for our salvation. Second stanza Prej lufte veç ai largohet Që është lindur tradhëtar, Kush është burrë nuk frikësohet, Po vdes, po vdes si një dëshmor! From the struggle only he turns his back, He who is born a traitor, He who is a true man is not frightened, But dies a martyr to the cause. Third stanza (not usually sung) Në dorë armët do t&apos;i mbajmë, Të mbrojmë atdheun në çdo kënd, Të drejtat tona ne s&apos;i ndajmë; Këtu armiqtë s&apos;kanë vënd! With weapons in our hands a-brandished, We will defend our fatherland, Our sacred rights we’ll not relinquish, The foe has no place in our land. Fourth stanza (not sung) Se Zoti vetë e tha me gojë Që kombe shuhen përmbi dhé, Po Shqipëria do të rrojë; Për të, për të luftojmë ne! For God himself proclaimed: The nations of the earth shall wane, And yet will live, will thrive Albania. For her our fight won’t be in vain. Fifth stanza (not sung) O Flamur, flamur, shenj&apos; e shenjtë tek ti betohemi këtu për Shqipërinë, atdheun e shtrenjtë, për nder&apos; edhe lavdimn e tu. O Flag, flag, you sacred symbol upon you we now swear for Albania, our dear fatherland for honour and your commends Sixth stanza (not sung) Trim burrë quhet dhe nderohet atdheut kush iu bë therror. Përjetë ai do të kujtohet mbi dhe, nën dhe si një shenjtor! Brave man is named and honoured the one who sacrificed himself for the fatherland Forever he will be remembered on earth and under as a saint! [ References ] [ Hymni i Flamurit instrumental.ogg Himni i Flamurit An instrumental recording of Himni i Flamuritby the United States Navy Band. Ogg ] [ External links ] [ Hymni i Flamurit ] Himni Kombëtar i Republikës së Shqipërisë Albania: &apos;&apos;Himni i Flamurit&apos;&apos; - Audio of the national anthem of Albania, with information and lyrics Category:National anthems Category:Albanian songs Category:National symbols of Albania an:Hymni i Flamurit ast:Hymni i Flamurit be:Гімн Албаніі be-x-old:Гімн Альбаніі bg:Химн на Албания bs:Himni i Flamurit ca:Hymni i Flamurit cs:Albánská hymna de:Himni i Flamurit et:Hymni i Flamurit el:Hymni i Flamurit es:Hymni i Flamurit eo:Nacia himno de Albanio fa:سرود ملی آلبانی fr:Hymni i Flamurit ga:Hymni i Flamurit gl:Hymni i Flamurit ko:알바니아의 국가 hr:Himni i Flamurit id:Himni i Flamurit it:Hymni i Flamurit he:המנון אלבניה jv:Hymni i Flamurit lt:Albanijos himnas hu:Albánia himnusza mk:Химна на Албанија ms:Hymni i Flamurit nl:Hymni i Flamurit ja:旗への賛歌 ce:Албани кхайкхаман илли oc:Himni i Flamurit pl:Hymn Albanii pt:Hymni i Flamurit ro:Hymni i Flamurit ru:Гимн Албании sq:Himni i Flamurit simple:Himni i Flamurit sr:Химна Албаније sh:Himni i Flamurit fi:Hymni i Flamurit sv:Himni i Flamurit th:ฮีมนี อี ฟลามูริท tg:Суруди миллии Албания uk:Гімн Албанії vo:Hymni i Flamurit yo:Himni i Flamurit zh:旗之赞歌