The Silures were a powerful and warlike tribe of ancient Britain, occupying approximately the counties of Monmouthshire, Breconshire and Glamorganshire of present day South Wales; and possibly Gloucestershire and Herefordshire of present day England. [ July 2010 ] They were bordered to the north by the Ordovices; to the east by the Dobunni; and to the west by the Demetae. [ Origins ] According to Tacitus &apos;s biography of Agricola, the Silures usually had a dark complexion and curly hair. Due to their appearance, Tacitus hinted that they may have crossed over from Spain at an earlier date. The Iron Age hillfort at Llanmelin near Caerwent has sometimes been suggested as a pre-Roman tribal centre, { BBC on Llanmelin } but the view of most archaeologists is that the people who became known as the Silures were a loose network of groups with some shared cultural values, rather than a centralised society. Although the most obvious physical remains of the Silures are hillforts such as those at Llanmelin and Sudbrook, there is also archaeological evidence of roundhouses at Gwehelog, Thornwell (Chepstow) and elsewhere, and evidence of lowland occupation notably at Goldcliff. { Miranda Aldhouse-Green and Ray Howell (eds.), Gwent In Prehistory and Early History: The Gwent County History Vol.1, 2004, ISBN 0-7083-1826-6 } The origin of the name &quot; Silures &quot; itself has been described as &quot; utterly unknown &quot;. { John Rhys, &apos;&apos;Celtic Britain&apos;&apos;, p.302 } A 19th-century antiquarian source posits an etymological relationship with Welsh Essyllwg and other forms of identical meaning, such as Essyllyr, meaning &quot; of Essyllt &quot; : { Annals &amp; Antiquities of the Counties and Families of Wales, Glamorganshire } however, this is now considered unlikely. A more plausible modern etymology would connect &apos;Silures&apos; to the Common Celtic root *sīlo-, &apos;seed&apos;. Words derived from this root in Celtic languages (e.g. Old Irish síl, Welsh hil) are used to mean &apos;blood-stock, descendants, lineage, offspring&apos;, as well as &apos;seed&apos; in the vegetable sense. &apos;Silures&apos; might therefore mean &apos;Kindred, Stock&apos;, perhaps referring to a tribal belief in a descent from an originating ancestor. [ August 2009 ] [ Fierce resistance to Roman forces ] Tribes of Wales at the time of the Roman invasion. The modern Anglo-Welsh border is also shown, for reference purposes. The Silures made a fierce resistance to the Roman conquest about AD 48, with the assistance of Caratacus, a military leader and prince of the Catuvellauni, who had fled from further east after his own tribe was defeated. The first attack on the Welsh tribes was made under the legate Publius Ostorius Scapula about 48 AD. Ostorius first attacked the Deceangli in the north-east of what is now Wales, who appear to have surrendered with little resistance. He then spent several years campaigning against the Silures and the Ordovices. Their resistance was led by Caratacus, who had fled from the south-east (of what is now England) when it was conquered by the Romans. He first led the Silures, then moved to the territory of the Ordovices, where he was defeated by Ostorius in 51 AD. The Silures were not subdued, however, and waged effective guerilla warfare against the Roman forces. Ostorius had publicly said that they posed such a danger that they should be either exterminated or transplanted. His threats only increased the Silures&apos; determination to resist and a large legionary force occupied in building Roman fort s in their territory was surrounded and attacked, and rescued only with difficulty and considerable loss. They also took Roman prisoners as hostages and distributed them amongst their neighbouring tribes in order to bind them together and encourage resistance. Ostorius died with the Silures still unconquered and, after his death, they won a victory over the Second Legion. It remains unclear whether the Silures were actually militarily defeated or simply agreed to come to terms, but Roman sources suggest rather opaquely that they were eventually subdued by Sextus Julius Frontinus in a series of campaigns ending about 78 AD. The Roman Tacitus wrote of the Silures: non atrocitate, non clementia mutabatur – &quot; changed neither by cruelty nor by clemency &quot;. [ Romanization ] To aid the Roman administration in keeping down local opposition, a legionary fortress ( Isca, later Caerleon ) was planted in the midst of tribal territory. The town of Venta Silurum ( Caerwent, six miles west of Chepstow ) was established in 75 AD. It became a Romanized town, not unlike Calleva Atrebatum ( Silchester ), but smaller. An inscription shows that under the Roman Empire it was the capital of the Silures, whose ordo or &quot; county council &quot; provided for the local government of the district. Its massive Roman walls still survive, and excavations have revealed a forum, a temple, baths, amphitheatre, shops, and many comfortable houses with mosaic floors, etc. In the late first and early second century, the Silures were given back some nominal independence and responsibility for local administration. As was standard practice, as revealed by inscriptions, the Romans matched their deities with local Silurian ones, and the local deity Ocelus was twinned with Mars, the Roman god of war. Caerwent seems to have continued in use in the post-Roman period as a religious centre and the territory of the Silures later became the Welsh Kingdom of Gwent, Brycheiniog, Gwynllwg and Glamorgan. Some theories concerning King Arthur make him a leader in this area. There is evidence of cultural continuity throughout the Roman period, from the Silures to the kingdom of Gwent in particular, as shown by leaders of Gwent using the name &quot; Caradoc &quot; in remembrance of the British hero Caratacus [ The term &quot; Silurian &quot; ] Reference is occasionally made to this period of Celt ic history by the use of terms such as &quot; Silurian &quot;. The poet Henry Vaughan called himself a &quot; Silurist &quot;, by virtue of his roots in South Wales. The geologic period Silurian was first described by Roderick Murchison in rocks located in the original lands of the Silures, hence the name. That period postdates the Cambrian and Ordovician periods, whose names are also derived from ancient Wales. [ References ] [ Silures ] [ External links ] Silures at Roman-Britain.org Silures at Romans in Britain Category:Ancient peoples Category:Gwent Category:History of Monmouthshire Category:History of Newport Category:History of Powys Category:Prehistoric Wales Category:Tribes of ancient Britain bg:Силури br:Silured ca:Silurs cs:Silurové cy:Silwriaid de:Silurer es:Siluros eo:Siluroj fr:Silures got:𐍃 𐌹 𐌻 𐌿 𐍂 𐍉 𐍃 id:Silures it:Siluri la:Silures no:Silurere ru:Силуры sr:Силури sh:Siluri