Karl Mannheim (March 27, 1893 – January 9, 1947), or Károly Mannheim in the original writing of his name, was a Jewish Hungarian-born sociologist, influential in the first half of the 20th century and one of the founding fathers of classical sociology and a founder of the sociology of knowledge. [ Life ] Mannheim was born in Budapest, and studied there and in Berlin, Paris and Heidelberg. In Budapest at the University of Budapest, he earned a doctorate in philosophy. { Ryan, Michael. &apos;Karl Mannheim&apos;, Encyclopedia of Social Theory, pp. 469. } In 1914 he attended lectures by Georg Simmel. [ December 2011 ] During the brief period of the Hungarian Soviet in 1919 he taught in a teacher training school thanks to the patronage of his friend and mentor György Lukács, { Karácsony, A. (2008). &apos;Soul–life–knowledge: The young Mannheim’s way to sociology&apos;, Studies in East European Thought. 60 (1/2), pp. 97-115. } whose political conversion to Communism he did not, however, share. { Longhurst, Brian (1989).Karl Mannheim and the Contemporary Sociology of Knowledge, New York: St Martins Press, pp. 1-197. } After the emergence of the harsh counter-revolutionary regime in Hungary, Mannheim chose exile in Germany. In Germany, Mannheim moved from Freiburg to Heildelberg, and in 1921 he married psychologist Julia Lang. From 1922 to 1925 he worked in Heidelberg under the German sociologist Alfred Weber, brother of the well-known sociologist Max Weber. { Werner, S. (1967). &apos;Karl Mannheim&apos;, Encyclopedia of Philosophy, pp. 1. } In 1926 Mannheim satisfied the requirements to teach classes in sociology at Heidelberg. In 1930 he became professor of sociology at the Johann Wolfgang Goethe University Frankfurt am Main. Norbert Elias and Hans Gerth worked as his assistants during this period (from spring 1930 until spring 1933), with Elias as the senior partner. Greta Kuckhoff also worked for him, leaving in 1933 to study at the London School of Economics (LSE) and prepare for Mannheim&apos;s emigration there. { Bernd-Rainer Barth, Helmut Müller-Enbergs: Biographische Datenbanken: Kuckhoff, Greta Bundesunmittelbare Stiftung des öffentlichen Rechts. Wer war wer in der DDR?, 5th edition, Volume 1 Ch. Links Verlag, Berlin (2010). ISBN 978-3-86153-561-4 } In 1933, after his ouster from his professorship, he fled the Nazi regime and settled in Britain, where he was appointed a lecturer in Sociology at LSE. In 1941 he was invited by Sir Fred Clarke, Director of the Institute of Education, University of London, to teach sociology on a part-time basis in conjunction with his role at LSE. In January 1946 he took up the full-time chair of education at the Institute of Education, which he held until his death in London a year later at the age of 53. During his time in England, Mannheim played a central role in &apos; The Moot &apos;, a Christian think-tank concerned with the role of culture in society, which was convened by J. H. Oldham. Mannheim’s biography, one of intellectual and geographical migration, falls into three main phases: Hungarian (to 1919), German (1919–1933), British (1933–1947). Among his valued intellectual sources were György Lukács, Oskar Jaszi, Georg Simmel, Martin Heidegger, Edmund Husserl, Karl Marx, Alfred and Max Weber, Max Scheler, and Wilhelm Dilthey. In his work, he sought variously to synthesize elements derived from German historicism, Marxism, phenomenology, sociology and Anglo-American pragmatism. [ Intellectual Work ] [ The Hungarian phase ] Mannheim was a precocious scholar and an accepted member of two influential circles, one centered on Oszkár Jászi and interested above all in French and English sociological writings, and one centered on György Lukács, with interests focused on the enthusiasms of German diagnosticians of cultural crisis, notably the novels of Fyodor Dostoyevsky and the writings of the German mystics. Mannheim&apos;s Hungarian writings, notably his doctoral dissertation &quot; Structural Analysis of Epistemology, &quot; anticipate his lifelong search for &quot; synthesis &quot; between these currents. According to Longhurst, the György Lukács led group, &quot; rejected any &apos;positivist&apos; or &apos;mechanist&apos; understanding of society and was dissatisfied with the existing political arrangements in Hungary. The way forward was seen to be through the spiritual renewal entailed in a revolution in culture &quot; The group members were discontent with the political and intellectual composition of Hungary, however, &quot; they rejected a materialist Marxist critique of this society. Hungary was to be changed by a spiritual renewal led by those who had reached a significant level of cultural awareness &quot;. Mannheim&apos;s work was influenced by Lukac&apos;s Marxist view, as he credits Marx as the forerunner to the sociology of knowledge. [ The German phase ] This was Mannheim&apos;s most productive period. In the early part of his stay in Germany, Mannheim published his doctoral dissertation &quot; Structural Epistemology of Knowledge &quot;, which discusses his theory of the structure of epistemology, &quot; relations between the knower, the known and the to be known…for Mannheim based on psychology, logic and ontology”. Sociologist Brian Longhurst explains, his work on epistemology represents the height of his early &quot; idealist &quot; phase, and transition to hermeneutic &quot; issues of interpretation within culture &quot;. In this essay, Mannheim introduces &quot; the hermeneutic problem of the relationship between the whole and the parts &quot;. He argues the differences between art, the natural sciences, and philosophy &quot; with respect to truth claims &quot;, stating science always tries to disprove one theory, where art never does this and can coexist in more than one world view; philosophy falls in between the two extremes. Mannheim posits the &quot; danger of relativism &quot;, in which historical process yields cultural product; &quot; if thought to be relative to a historical period, it may be unavailable to a historical period &quot; In this period he turned from philosophy to sociology, inquiring into the roots of culture. His essays on the sociology of knowledge have become classics. In Ideology and Utopia he argued that the application of the term ideology ought to be broadened. He traced the history of the term from what he called a &quot; particular &quot; view. This view saw ideology as the perhaps deliberate obscuring of facts. This view gave way to a &quot; total &quot; conception (most notably in Marx ) which argued that a whole social group&apos;s thought was formed by its social position (e.g. the proletariat&apos;s beliefs were conditioned by their relationship to the means of production). However, he called for a further step which he called a general total conception of ideology, in which it was recognised that everyone&apos;s beliefs—including the social scientist&apos;s—were a product of the context they were created in. Mannheim points out social class, location and generation as the greatest determinants of knowledge. He feared this could lead to relativism but proposed the idea of relationism as an antidote. { Tsekeris, C. (2010). Relationalism in Sociology: Theoretical and Methodological Elaborations, Facta Universitatis. Series: Philosophy, Sociology, Psychology and History, 9 (1), pp. 139-148. } To uphold the distinction, he maintained that the recognition of different perspectives according to differences in time and social location appears arbitrary only to an abstract and disembodied theory of knowledge. The list of reviewers of the German Ideology and Utopia includes a remarkable roll call of individuals who became famous in exile, after the rise of Hitler: Hannah Arendt, Max Horkheimer, Herbert Marcuse, Paul Tillich, Hans Speier, Günther Stern (aka Günther Anders ), Waldemar Gurian, Siegfried Kracauer, Otto Neurath, Karl August Wittfogel, Béla Fogarasi, and Leo Strauss. [ December 2011 ] Mannheim&apos;s ambitious attempt to promote a comprehensive sociological analysis of the structures of knowledge was treated with suspicion by Marxists and neo-Marxists of what was the grouping that was later recognized as an antecedent of the Frankfurt School. They saw the rising popularity of the sociology of knowledge as a neutralization and a betrayal of Marxist inspiration. Relations between Mannheim and Horkheimer were however correct, and there is no evidence that students were enlisted in the arguments between them, which played out in faculty forums, like the Kant Gesellschaft and Paul Tillich&apos;s Christian Socialist discussion group. Horkheimer&apos;s Institute at the time was best known for the empirical work it encouraged, and several of Mannheim&apos;s doctoral students used its resources. While this intramural contest looms large in retrospect, Mannheim&apos;s most active contemporary competitors were in fact other academic sociologists, notably the gifted proto-fascist Leipzig professor, Hans Freyer, and the proponent of formal sociology and leading figure in the profession, Leopold von Wiese. [ December 2011 ] [ The British phase ] In his British phase Mannheim attempted a comprehensive analysis of the structure of modern society by way of democratic social planning and education. Mannheim&apos;s first major work published during this period was Man and Society in an Age of Reconstruction 1935, in which he argues for a shift from liberal order of laissez-faire capitalism, &quot; founded on the unregulated trade cycle, unextended democracy, free competition and ideas of competitive individualism &quot; to planned democracy In Diagnosis of Our Time, Mannheim expands on this argument and expresses concern for the transition from liberal order to planned democracy, according to Longhurst, arguing &quot;...the embryonic planned democratic society can develop along democratic or dictorial routes...as expressed in the totalitarian societies of Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union &quot;. His work was admired more by educators, social workers, and religious thinkers than it was by the small community of British sociologists. His books on planning nevertheless played an important part in the political debates of the immediate post-war years, both in the United States and in several European countries. [ Legacy ] Mannheim&apos;s book Ideologie und Utopie (1929) was the most widely debated book by a living sociologist in Germany during the Weimar Republic; the English version Ideology and Utopia (1936) has been a standard in American-style international academic sociology, carried by the interest it aroused in the United States. The quite different German and English versions of the book figure in reappraisals of Mannheim initiated by new textual discoveries and republications. Mannheim’s sociological theorizing has been the subject of numerous book-length studies, evidence of an international interest in his principal themes. Mannheim was not the author of any work he himself considered a finished book, but rather of some fifty major essays and treatises, most later published in book form. [ Selected works ] Mannheim, K. ([1922-24] 1980) Structures of Thinking. London: Routledge &amp; Kegan Paul. Mannheim, K. ([1925] 1986) Conservatism. A Contribution to the Sociology of Knowledge. London: Routledge &amp; Kegan Paul. Mannheim, K. (1929), Ideologie und Utopie Mannheim, K. (1936) Ideology and Utopia. London: Routledge. Mannheim, K. (1940) Man and Society in an Age of Reconstruction. London: Routledge. Mannheim, K. ([1930] 2001) Sociology as Political Education. New Brunswick, NJ. Transaction. Mannheim, K. (1971. 1993) From Karl Mannheim. New Brunswick, NJ. Transaction. [ Further reading ] Richard Aldrich, (2002) The Institute of Education 1902-2002: A centenary history, London: Institute of Education. David Frisby, (1983) The Alienated Mind, London: Heineman. David Kettler, Volker Meja, and Nico Stehr (1984), Karl Mannheim, London: Tavistock. David Kettler and Volker Meja, (1995) Karl Mannheim and the Crisis of Liberalism, New Brunswick and London: Transaction. Colin Loader, (1985) The Intellectual Development of Karl Mannheim, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Colin Loader and David Kettler (2001) Karl Mannheim&apos;s Sociology as Political Education New Brunswick and London: Transaction. Volker Meja and Nico Stehr (eds), (1982[1990]) Knowledge and Politics. The Sociology of Knowledge Dispute, London: Routledge &amp; Kegan Paul. Eva Karadi and Erzsebet Vezer, (1985) Georg Lukacs, Karl Mannheim und der Sonntagskreis, Frankfurt/M: Sendler. Reinhard Laube (2004) Karl Mannheim und die Krise des Historismus, Goettingen: Vandenhoeck &amp; Ruprecht. [ See also ] Theory of generations [ References ] [ External links ] Karl-Mannheim Chair for Cultural Studies, Zeppelin University, Friedrichshafen, Germany Studies of Karl Mannheim. Likenesses of Mannheim in the National Portrait Gallery. [ Mannheim, Karl March 27, 1893 January 9, 1947 ] Category:1893 births Category:1947 deaths Category:Hungarian sociologists Category:Hungarian Jews Category:Jews who emigrated to the United Kingdom to escape Nazism Category:Academics of the London School of Economics Category:People from Budapest Category:Goethe University Frankfurt faculty Category:University of Heidelberg faculty Category:Sociology index zh-min-nan:Karl Mannheim bg:Карл Манхайм bs:Karl Mannheim cs:Karl Mannheim de:Karl Mannheim es:Karl Mannheim fa:کارل مانهایم fr:Karl Mannheim ko:카를 만하임 it:Karl Mannheim he:קרל מאנהיים kk:Карл Маннгейм hu:Mannheim Károly nl:Karl Mannheim ja:カール・マンハイム pl:Karl Mannheim pt:Karl Mannheim ro:Karl Mannheim ru:Маннгейм, Карл sv:Karl Mannheim uk:Карл Маннгайм zh:卡爾·曼海姆