[ October 2011 ] { Talakaveri } { Talakaveri, origin of the river } Kaveri river flows in South Karnataka and then to Tamil Nadu. The Kaveri, also spelled Cauvery in English, is a large India n river. The origin of the river is traditionally placed at Talakaveri, Kodagu in the Western Ghats in Karnataka, flows generally south and east through Karnataka and Tamil Nadu and across the southern Deccan plateau through the southeastern lowlands, emptying into the Bay of Bengal through two principal mouths. The Kaveri basin is estimated to be [ 27700 sqmi km2 ] with many tributaries including the Shimsha, the Hemavati, the Arkavati, Honnuhole, Lakshmana Tirtha, Kabini, Bhavani River, the Lokapavani, the Noyyal and the Amaravati River. Rising in southwestern Karnataka, it flows southeast some 475  mi (765  km) to enter the Bay of Bengal. East of Mysore it forms the island of Shivanasamudra, on either side of which are the scenic Shivanasamudra Falls that descend about 320  ft (100 m). [ http://www.world-waterfalls.com/waterfall.php?num%3D149 World Waterfall Database 9 November 2006 ] The river is the source for an extensive irrigation system and for hydroelectric power. [ http://www.cauvery.com/shivasamudram.html Shivasamudram Falls cauvery.com 11 November 2006 ] The river has supported irrigated agriculture for centuries and served as the lifeblood of the ancient kingdoms and modern cities of South India. [ Etymology ] The name &apos;Kaveri&apos; is said to be derived from Kavera Maharshi to whom the river Goddess was given as a foster child by Brahma. [ December 2011 ] Another version says that the word Kaveri is derived from the two Tamil words ka (fertile land) and viri (to extend). It means wherever the river flows the land along its basin is fertile. [ December 2011 ] [ River course ] { Thiruchirapalli } Hogenakkal Waterfalls in Dharmapuri district, Tamil Nadu The Kaveri River as seen from State Highway 20, near the Mettur Dam. Kaveri in Mysore After the river leaves the Kodagu hills and flows onto the Deccan plateau, it forms two islands, Srirangapatna and Shivanasamudra. At Sivasamudra the river drops [ 320 ft on ], forming the famous Shivanasamudra Falls known separately as Gagana Chukki and Bhara Chukki. Asia&apos;s first hydroelectric plant (built in 1902) was on the left falls and supplied power to the city of Bangalore. In its course through Karnataka, the channel is interrupted by twelve &quot; anicuts &quot; (dams) for the purpose of irrigation. From the anicut at Madadkatte, an artificial channel is diverted at a distance of [ 72 mi km ], irrigating an area of [ 10000 acre on ], and ultimately bringing its water supply to the town of Mandya. Near Srirangapatna, there is an aqueduct, the Bangara Doddi Nala, which was constructed in the 17th century by the Wodeyar maharaja of Mysore, Ranadhira Kantirava, in memory of his favorite consort. It is said to be the only aqueduct where the water from a river, dammed upstream, is carried by the aqueduct over the very same river few miles downstream [ February 2007 ]. This aqueduct also served as a motorable bridge until 1964. In addition to providing many ancient and modern canals with water from the river for irrigation purposes, the Kaveri also serves as the main drinking water source for many towns and villages. The cities of Bangalore, { BWSSB } Mandya and Mysore depend almost entirely on the Kaveri for their drinking water supply. In fact, the river is called Jeevanadhi which, in Kannada, means a river supporting life. The river enters Tamil Nadu through Dharmapuri district leading to the flat plains where it meanders. It drops into the Hogenakkal Falls just before it arrives in the town of Hogenakkal in Tamil Nadu. The three minor tributaries, Palar, Chennar and Thoppar enter into the Kaveri on her course, above Stanley Reservoir in Mettur, where the dam has been constructed. The Mettur Dam joins the Sita and Pala mountains beyond that valley through which the Kaveri flows, up to the Grand Anicut. The dam in Mettur impounds water not only for the improvement of irrigation but also to ensure the regular and sufficient supply of water to the important Hydro-Electric generating station at Mettur. The river further runs through the length Erode district where river Bhavani, which running through the breadth of the district, merges with it. The confluence of the rivers Kaveri, Bhavani and Akash Ganga (imaginary) is at the exact place of Bhavani Kooduthurai or Tiriveni Sangamam, Northern a part of Erode City. While passing through Erode, two more tributaries merge.Thirumani Mutharu join it in a village called Kududurai in Namakkal District. Noyyal and Amaravathi join it in Karur district before it reaches Tiruchirapalli district. Here the river becomes wide, with a sandy bed, and flows in an easterly direction until it splits into two at upper Anicut about 14 kilometres west of Tiruchirappalli. The northern branch of the river is called the Kollidam while the southern branch retains the name Kaveri and then goes directly eastwards into Thanjavur District. These two rivers join again and form the Srirangam island which is a part of city of Tiruchirapalli. Doddabetta (2,637m) is the highest point of the Kaveri basin. [ Tributaries ] Hemavati River Shimsha Arkavathy River Kabini River Harangi River [ History ] The Chola king Karikalan has been immortalised as he constructed the bank for the Kaveri all the way from Puhar (Kaveripoompattinam) to Srirangam. It was built as far back as 1,600 years ago or even more. On both sides of the river are found walls spreading to a distance of [ 1080 ft m ]. The Kallanai dam constructed by him on the border between Tiruchirappalli and Thanjavur is a superb work of engineering, which was made with earth and stone and has stood the vagaries of nature for hundreds of years. In 19th century, it was renovated on a bigger scale. The name of the historical dam has since been changed to “Grand Anicut” and stands as the head of a great irrigation system in the Thanjavur district. From this point, the Kollidam River runs north-east and discharges into the sea at Devakottai, a little south of Parangipettai. From river Kollidam, Manniar and Uppanai branch off at lower Anicut and irrigates a portion of Mayiladuthurai taluk and Sirkazhi taluk in Nagapatnam District. After Grand Anicut, the Kaveri divides into numerous branches and covers the whole of the delta with a vast network of irrigation channels in Nagapatnam and Tiruvarur districts and gets lost in the wide expanse of paddy fields. The Kaveri here is reduced to an insignificant channel and enters the Bay of Bengal at the historical place of Poompuhar about [ 13 km on ] north of Tharangampadi. [ Usage ] Stanley Reservoir formed by Mettur Dam The primary uses of Kaveri are providing water for irrigation, water for household consumption and the generation of electricity. An estimate at the time of the first Five Year Plan puts the total flow of the Kaveri at [ 12000000 acre.ft km3 ], of which 60% was used for irrigation. { http://planningcommission.nic.in/plans/planrel/fiveyr/1st/1planch26.html } The Torekadanahalli pumpstation sends 540 Mld (million liters per day) of water from Kaveri 100  km to Bangalore. { Bangaloreit.com } { http://www.tce.co.in/infra/watersupply/bangalore.pdf#search=%22halli%20pipeline%20Bangalore%22 } The water for the Kaveri is primarily supplied by monsoon rains. Dams, such as the Krishna Raja Sagara Dam and Mettur Dam, and those on its tributaries such as Banasura Sagar Dam project on a Kabini tributary, store water from monsoon periods and release the water during the dry months. Even so, during the months of February–May, water levels are often quite low, and in some channels and distributaries riverbeds may become dry. [ February 2007 ] Flow generally begins to increase in June or July [ February 2007 ]. However, in some years when rains are light, the low river level can lead to agricultural distress in areas dependent upon the Kaveri for irrigation. [ February 2007 ] The hydroelectric plant built on the left Sivanasamudra Falls on the Kaveri in 1902 was the first hydroelectric plant in Karnataka. The Krishna Raja Sagara Dam has a capacity of 49 tmc ft. [ http://www.hindu.com/2006/03/26/stories/2006032614180300.htm Chennai, India The Hindu Corporation urged to chalk out water policy for Mysore city 26 March 2006 ] and the Mettur Dam which creates Stanley Reservoir has a capacity of 93.4 tmc ft. (thousand million cubic ft) In August 2003, inflow into reservoirs in Karnataka was at a 29 year low, with a 58% shortfall. [ Cauvery reservoirs’ inflow hits record low http://archive.deccanherald.com/deccanherald/aug03/i3.asp 18 March 2011 Deccan Herald 2 August 2003 Bangalore ] Water stored in Krishna Raja Sagara amounted to only 4.6 tmc ft. [ Water sharing ] [ See Kaveri River Water Dispute ] [ Significance in Hinduism ] Devotees throwing coins at Talakaveri Talakaveri is a pilgrimage site set amidst Bramahagiri Hills in Kodagu. Thousands of piligrims flock to the three temples at the source of the river, especially on the specified day known as Tula sankramana when the river water has been said to gush out like a fountain at a predetermined time. There are several legends about how the river Kaveri came into being. Chapters 11–14 of the Shanda purana (also known as the Kaveri purana) relate many of them. According to the most well known version, when the great ocean was churned by the devas and the asuras in order to obtain amrita, the elixir of life, Lord Vishnu created Mohini, a non-pareil of infinite charm and appeal, to distract the asuras and restore the elixir to the devas. Goddess lakshmi also sent along Lopamudre, an incarnation of Parvathi, to assist Mohini. After the elixir was successfully restored to the devas Mohini retired to Brahmagiri and turned into a rocky cave. Lopamudre was brought up by Brahma as his daughter. After some time Kavera, a sage of renown, came to the Brahmagiri to meditate. Kavera was lonely and prayed to Lord Brahma that he might bless him with a child. Brahma was pleased by his devotion and gave him lopamudre for a daughter. Lopamudre was renamed Kaveri after the sage. Kaveri was very keen that her father should have every happiness and prosperity in life and a blessed land full of good and happy people. So she went to the Brahmagiri too and prayed to Lord Brahma that she might turn into a river and flow through the country, pouring her blessings on the peopleand turning the land green and fertile. She also prayed that her waters might be so holy that all those who took a dip in it might be absolved of all their sins. Brahma granted her both the boons readily and Kaveri was really happy. But something else was to happen to her first. Sage agastya happened to see Kaveri when she was deep in meditation on the Brahmagiri. He fell in love with her and asked her to marry him. Although her heart was set on turning into a river of blessings, Kaveri could not refuse agastya. But she made him promise that if ever she left her alone too long she would have the right to forsake him and go her way.Agastya promised and kept his word faithfully for some time. But one day he got busy in a theological discussion with his disciples and lost track of time. Kaveri waited patiently for a while but after some hours had passed she jumped into agastya’s special holy tank and flowed from it like a river. As soon as the disciples of agastya saw what had happened they tried to stop her from flowing away. But Kaveri promptly went underground and appeared again at Bhaganda Kshetra and flowed on toward Valambari and finally into the Bay of Bengal. And it has been worshipped as a sacred river – throughout its course – ever since. There is yet another interesting belief according to which the river Ganges also joins Kaveri underground once a year, during the Tulamasa, in order to wash herself free of the pollution caused by the crowds of sinners who bathe in her waters all the year round. Kaveri is considered to be as sacred as the Ganges throughout its course, with the same power to wash off all one’s sins. But Bhagamandala, where the three rivers meet, is considered to be the most sacred spot of all. There are temples all along its banks visited by thousands of pilgrims. Kaveri is joined by several rivers, the most important ones being Kakkabe, Kadanur, Kummahole, Hemavathi, Lakshmanatirtha, Shimsha etc., it flows into the Bay of Bengal in Thanjavur district in Tamil Nadu. During the month of Tula (Tamil month Ippasi), devotees take holy dip (tula snanam) in the Kavery in the pilgrim centers in its banks across the two states of Karnataka and Tamil Nadu, most prominent of them being Bhagamandala in Karnataka and Mayavaram in Tamil Nadu – which is home to famous Thula Kattam bathing ghat in the river banks. The cult of the river Goddess began in Kodagu and was centered in Bhaganda Kshetra (Bhagamandala). The three major river islands at Kaveri have a strong Vaishnava heritage, with sculptures of Lord Vishnu in a reclining posture on the legendary seven-headed serpent ( Sesha ) as his celestial bed (Sheshashayana). These three temples are known as Adi Ranga, Madya Ranga, and Anthya Ranga. On the banks of the Kaveri is the ancient temple town of Talakad where the holy festival Panchalinga Darshana is held every 12 years and devotees bathe in the Kaveri River. [ http://www.indiantemples.com/Karnataka/talakkad.html Talakkad – Panchalinga Temples TempleNet 31 January 2007 ] [ Prominent towns / religious sites in the Kaveri banks ] Government Arts College bridge across the Kaveri River Scene on the Cauvery River, c. 1905 Talakaveri Bhagamandala Kushalnagar Srirangapatna Talakad Tirumakudalu Narasipura Bhavani – Thirunana Kodumudi Velur Mohanur Musiri Kulithalai Tiruchirappalli Srirangam Thiruvaiyaru Thirukattupalli Swamimalai Kumbakonam Mayavaram Poompuhar [ Veneration as a goddess ] { The legend of Kaveri has its origins in } { Puranas. Kaveri is directly linked with three puranic icons } sag http://www.ramanuja.org/sv/bhakti/archives/oct2002/0184.html { i.e. Agasthya, King Kavera and Lopamudra, the earthly, feminine manifestation of Kaveri herself. It is held that Lopamudra was granted the form of a river, by Brahma, in answer to } { tapas performed by all the three, including herself. } Both saint Agasthya and king Kavera were independently performing tapas with salvation ( Moksha ) as the goal. Pleased by their tapas, Brahma appears before them only to deny both immediate Moksha. Instead, Brahma rules to Kavera that he shall beget a daughter who will lead him to Moksha; to Agasthya, Brahma says, he shall give him a divine wife; Agasthya is to live with her and enrich the world before eventually attaining Moksha. In the meantime it was said that Vishnumaya, the divine daughter of Brahma—the impeccable feminine creation of the creator, expressing to Brahma her wish to serve the world. Being pleased, Brahma ordain her to be, in due time, Lopamudra, the daughter of Kavera, then the wife of Agasthya, and eventually the sacred of the sacred, the river Kaveri. In a slightly different version, Kaveri is regarded as the outpour of sage Agasthya&apos;s Kamandala; it is said the Lord Ganesh, assuming the form of a crow, upset Agasthya&apos;s Kamandala to release the Kaveri. After assuming the form river, Kaveri performed another tapas to become the sacred of rivers, more sacred than even the Ganges. Her tapas was answered and Lord Vishnu appears before her. On hearing her wish, Lord Vishnu says &quot; Ganges is sacred because she originates from my feet; but you are infinitely more sacred to her as I adorn you as my garland &quot;. Upon this blessing, it is said that even the Ganges is said to come underground, once a year, to Kaveri to cleanse herself. To this day, Vaishnavites regard Kaveri, the river that holds Srirangam in her bosom, as the most sacred of rivers. Vaishnavaites lovingly regard Kaveri as the mother of Ranganayaki, the divine consort of Lord Ranganatha of Srirangam in Tiruchirappalli. [ Scene on the Cauvery River ] [ May 2012 ] A gigantic new irrigation and electrical project estimated to cost one hundred and fifty lakhs of Rupees, has been occupying the Mysore Government for some time in connection with the River Cauvery, this irrespective of the Falls which are at present producing enormous power. The photograph we reproduce was taken on the Cauvery at the point known as &quot; The Goat&apos;s Leap. &quot; Courtesy of Special Collections, University of Houston Libraries. &quot; [ See also ] List of rivers of India [ References ] [ External links ] [ Kaveri ] Adventurer Alastair Humphreys walking the length of the Kaveri River Cauvery Presentation on the Cavery River [ 11 21 40 N 79 49 46 E type:waterbody_region:IN_dim:10000 title ] Category:Rivers of Tamil Nadu Category:Rivers of Karnataka Category:Ancient Indian rivers Category:Sacred rivers [ ml ] bn:কাবেরী নদী ca:Kaveri cs:Kávérí da:Kaveri de:Kaveri es:Río Kaveri fr:Kâverî gl:Río Kaveri hi:कावेरी नदी it:Kaveri kn:ಕಾವೇರಿ ನದಿ lt:Kaveris ml:കാവേരി mr:कावेरी नदी nl:Kaveri ne:कावेरी नदी new:कावेरि (सन् २००२या संकिपा) ja:カーヴィリ川 or:କାବେରୀ ନଦୀ pnb:دریاۓ کویری pl:Kaweri pt:Rio Kaveri ru:Кавери sa:कावेरीनदी simple:Kaveri River fi:Kaveri sv:Kaveri ta:காவிரி ஆறு te:కావేరి నది tg:Дарёи Кавери uk:Кавері ur:دریائے کاویری vi:Kaveri zh:高韦里河