[ August 2010 ] [ November 2009 ] { Elizabeth II, } { Queen of } { Canada } { Army } { 35,500 total personnel } { Land Force Atlantic Area } { Land Force Quebec Area } { Land Force Central Area } { Land Force Western Area } { Department of National Defence } { Canadian Forces } { National Defence Headquarters } { Headquarters } { Vigilamus pro Te(We Stand on Guard for Thee) } { &quot; Celer Paratus Callidus &quot; } { &lt; div style= &quot; width: 220px; &quot; &gt; } { Wolseley Expedition } { Second Boer War } { World War I } { World War II } { Korean War } { October Crisis } { Persian Gulf War } { Oka crisis } { War in Afghanistan } { General } { Walter Natynczyk CMM, MSC, CD } { Chief of the Defence Staff } { Lieutenant-General Peter J. Devlin, CMM, MSC, CD } { Commander, Canadian Army } { Major-General A.J. Howard, CD } { Deputy Commander } { border } { Flag of the Canadian Army } The Canadian Army (French: Armée canadienne) is the branch of the Canadian Forces responsible for land warfare. In 2011, the Army comprised 19,500 regular soldiers and 16,000 reserve soldiers, for a total of around 35,500 soldiers. [ http://www.army.forces.gc.ca/land-terre/ata-asl/index-eng.asp About the Army Department of National Defence 31 August 2010 ] It maintains regular forces units at bases across Canada and is also responsible for the largest component of the Primary Reserve, the Army Reserve. The Commander Canadian Army is Lieutenant-General Peter Devlin. The term &quot; Canadian Army &quot; has been traditionally applied to the land forces of Canada&apos;s military from Confederation in 1867 to the present. However, the name Canadian Army was only officially used beginning in 1940. In 1965, as a precursor to the unification of the navy, army, and air force, all army units were placed under a new entity called Mobile Command. In 1968 the Canadian Army ceased to exist as a legal entity as the navy, army, and air force were merged to form a single service called the Canadian Forces. Mobile Command was renamed Land Force Command in a 1993 reorganization of the Canadian Forces. In August 2011, Land Force Command reverted to the pre-1968 title, the Canadian Army. [ http://www.cbc.ca/news/politics/story/2011/08/15/pol-canadian-forces-names.html?ref%3Drss CBC News Navy and air force to be royal once again 16 August 2011 ] [ History ] [ History of the Canadian Army ] Prior to Confederation in 1867, the British Army, which included Canadian militia units, defended Canada in wartime. After 1867, a Permanent Active Militia was formed, and in later decades several regular bodies of troops were created, their descendants becoming the Royal Canadian Horse Artillery, the Royal Canadian Dragoons, and the Royal Canadian Regiment. Regular Canadian troops participated in the North West Rebellion in 1885, the South African War ( Second Boer War ) in 1899, and, in much larger numbers, constituted the Canadian Expeditionary Force in World War I. In 1940, during World War II, the Permanent Active Militia was renamed the Canadian Army (Active), supplemented by the non-permanent militia, which was named the Canadian Army (Reserve). The Army participated in the Korean War and formed part of the NATO presence in West Germany during the Cold War. In the years following its unification with the navy and air force in 1968, the size of Canada&apos;s land forces was reduced, but Canadian troops participated in a number of military actions with Canada&apos;s allies, including the Gulf War in 1991 and the invasion of Afghanistan in 2001, as well as peacekeeping operations under United Nations auspices in various parts of the world. Notably, despite Canada&apos;s usual strong support of British and American initiatives, Canada&apos;s land forces did not directly participate in the Vietnam War or the Iraq War. [ Structure ] [ Structure of the Canadian Army ] Command of the Army is exercised by National Defence Headquarters in Ottawa. The Army is divided into four regional command areas: Land Force Atlantic Area Land Force Quebec Area Land Force Central Area Land Force Western Area Each area is responsible for the regular army and reserve forces located within its geographical purview. All except Land Force Atlantic Area has a regular army mechanized brigade group under its command, together with between two and three reserve brigades. Each mechanized brigade group contains three infantry battalion s, an armoured regiment, an artillery regiment, and a combat engineer regiment. Each brigade group also contains a service support battalion, signals squadron and military police platoon. In addition to the four regional command areas, the Land Force Doctrine and Training System, commanded by a major-general and headquartered at McNaughton Barracks, CFB Kingston, Ontario, is responsible for the supervision, integration and delivery of Army training and doctrine development, including simulation and digitization. It includes a number of schools and training organizations, such as the Combat Training Centre at CFB Gagetown, New Brunswick, and the Canadian Manoeuvre Training Centre at CFB Wainwright, Alberta. { Department of National Defence, 2011. Leader in Land Operations: LFDTS Land Force Doctrine and Training System } [ Leadership ] The senior appointment within Canadian Land Forces was entitled Chief of the General Staff until 1964 when the appointment became Commander, Mobile Command with the unification of Canada&apos;s military forces. { Dr. Wilf Lund (n.d.) Integration and Unification of the Canadian Forces, CFB Esquimalt Naval &amp; Military Museum, www.navalandmilitarymuseum.org } The position was renamed Chief of the Land Staff in 1993. { Major Andrew B. Godefroy CD PhD (2007) &apos;&apos;Chasing the Silver Bullet: the Evolution of Capability Development in the Canadian Army&apos;&apos;, Canadian Military Journal, vol 8, no 1, pg 59.] } Following the renaming of the Canadian Army in 2011, the position became Commander Canadian Army. Officers are selected in several ways: The Regular Officer Training Plan, where candidates are educated at the Royal Military College of Canada (RMC) or at civilian Canadian universities. Direct Entry officer Plan, for those who already hold a university degree or technology diploma. Continuing Education Officer Training Plan, addresses shortages in certain officer occupations, and is intended to attract candidates who are otherwise qualified for service as officers, but who lack a degree. Candidates complete their degrees while serving in the Army. CF Military Personnel Instructions 09/05 University Training Plan (Non-Commissioned Members), designed to develop selected serving non-commissioned members for service as career officers in the Regular Force. Normally, candidates selected for this plan will attend RMC or a civilian university in Canada. CFAO 9-13—University Training Plan—Non-Commissioned Members Commissioning From the Ranks Plan, provides officers to augment the number of officers commissioned through other plans and applies exclusively to those who have acquired some military experience and possess the necessary qualities that make them suitable for employment as officers. CFAO 11-9—Commissioning From The Ranks Plan Special Requirements Commissioning Plan, is designed to meet the needs of the officer occupations. It allows the Canadian Forces to profit from the skills and experience of senior non-commissioned members and may provide an opportunity for career advancement for selected deserving Chief Warrant Officers. CFAO 11-14—Special Requirements Commissioning Plan Subsidized special education, which includes the Medical Officer Training Plan or Dental Officer Training Plan. The Canadian Officer Selection System Retrieved 17 August 2011 In addition there were other commissioning plans such as the Officer Candidate Training Plan and Officer Candidate Training Plan (Men) for commissioning serving members which are no longer in effect. Occupational training for Canadian Army officers takes place at one of the schools of the Combat Training Centre for Army-controlled occupations (Armour, Artillery, Infantry, Electrical and Mechanical Engineers, etc.) or at a Canadian Forces school, such as the Canadian Forces School of Administration and Logistics or the Defence Public Affairs Learning Centre for officers from career fields controlled outside the Army. [ Regular force ] [ List of units of the Canadian Army ] Canadian infantry and armoured regimental traditions are strongly rooted in the traditions and history of the British Army. Many regiments were patterned after regiments of the British Army, and a system of official &quot; alliances &quot;, or affiliations, was created to perpetuate a sense of shared history. Other regiments developed independently, resulting in a mixture of both colourful and historically familiar names. Other traditions such as battle honour s and colours have been maintained by Canadian regiments as well. Approximately two-thirds of the Regular Force is composed of anglophone units, while one third is francophone. { Regular Force who rely on the Reserves for augmentation on operational deployments. } Between 1953 and 1971, the regular Canadian infantry consisted of seven regiments, each of two battalions (except the Royal 22 e Régiment, which had three, the Canadian Guards which had four battalions between 1953 and 1957 and the Canadian Airborne Regiment, which was divided into three &quot; commandos &quot; ). The three present regular infantry regiments were augmented by three further regiments each of two battalions: The Canadian Guards The Queen&apos;s Own Rifles of Canada The Black Watch (Royal Highland Regiment) of Canada Following the unification of the Canadian Forces in 1968, the Regular Force battalions of the QOR and the Black Watch were dissolved (their Militia battalions remained in Toronto and Montreal, respectively), the Regular regiment of The Fort Garry Horse was disbanded and the Canadian Guards were reduced to nil strength. The 1st Battalion of the Canadian Guards was disbanded on 1 October 1968. On 6 July 1970, the 2nd Battalion The Canadian Guards was reduced to nil strength and transferred to the Supplementary Order of Battle, with the unit&apos;s soldiers and officers becoming the 3rd Battalion, The Royal Canadian Regiment. On 1 July 1970, the 1st and 2nd Battalions of The Black Watch (Royal Highland Regiment) of Canada were reduced to nil strength and transferred to the Supplementary Order of Battle, and the Reserve Force battalion automatically relinquished its numerical designation. On 15 September 1968, the 2nd Battalion the Queen&apos;s Own Rifles of Canada was reduced to nil strength and transferred to the Supplementary Order of Battle, while when the 1st Battalion was reduced to nil strength and transferred to the Supplementary Order of Battle on 27 April 1970, with the unit&apos;s officers and soldiers forming the 3rd Battalion, Princess Patricia&apos;s Canadian Light Infantry. The Reserve Force battalion automatically relinquished its numerical designation at that time. The Canadian Airborne Regiment was disbanded in 1995. { Canadian Forces Publication A-DH-267-003/AF-002—Part Two: Infantry Regiments } The Regular Force regiment of the 8th Canadian Hussars (Princess Louise&apos;s), formed in 1957, was converted to a mixed Regular and Reserve “Total Force” unit with the close-out of 4 Canadian Mechanized Brigade Group at Lahr, Germany in 1994, before reverting to a Reserve regiment in 1997. { Canadian Forces Publication A-DH-267-003/AF-001—Part One: Armour, Artillery and Field Engineer Regiments } The regular forces currently consist of the following regiments: [ Infantry ] Regular Force infantry regiments and battalions of the Canadian Army are: 1st Battalion ( CFB Petawawa ) – mechanized infantry 2nd Battalion ( CFB Gagetown ) – mechanized infantry 3rd Battalion ( CFB Petawawa ) – light infantry and parachute company { Princess Patricia&apos;s Canadian Light Infantry } 1st Battalion ( CFB Edmonton ) – mechanized infantry 2nd Battalion ( CFB Shilo ) – mechanized infantry 3rd Battalion ( CFB Edmonton ) – light infantry and parachute company { Royal 22 e Régiment } 1 er Bataillon ( CFB Valcartier ) – mechanized infantry 2 e Bataillon ( Quebec City ) – mechanized infantry 3 e Bataillon ( CFB Valcartier ) – light infantry and parachute company [ Artillery ] Canada&apos;s regular field artillery has traditionally been called the Royal Canadian Horse Artillery. Canada currently has four Regular Force regiments: 1st Regiment, Royal Canadian Horse Artillery ( CFB Shilo ) 2nd Regiment, Royal Canadian Horse Artillery ( CFB Petawawa ) 5 e Régiment d&apos;artillerie légère du Canada ( CFB Valcartier ) 4th Air Defence Regiment, Royal Canadian Artillery ( CFB Gagetown ) [ Armour ] { LAV III. } Regular Force units include: The Royal Canadian Dragoons – CFB Petawawa, Ontario Lord Strathcona&apos;s Horse (Royal Canadians) – CFB Edmonton, Alberta 12 e Régiment blindé du Canada – CFB Valcartier and Trois-Rivières, Quebec [ Combat engineers ] 1 Combat Engineer Regiment – CFB Edmonton, Alberta 2 Combat Engineer Regiment – CFB Petawawa, Ontario 4 Engineer Support Regiment – CFB Gagetown, New Brunswick 5 Combat Engineer Regiment – CFB Valcartier, Quebec [ Electronic warfare ] { Browning Hi-Power } 2 Electronic Warfare Squadron (Regular) 772 Electronic Warfare Squadron (Reserve) [ Reserve force units ] A Canadian soldier fires the current issue C7A2 rifle at the range with a C79A2 sight. This particular example is missing the standard TRIAD mount. 36 Canadian Brigade Group Headquarters 36 Canadian Brigade Group (NS) Band (music) The Halifax Rifles (RCAC) (armoured) (Halifax, Nova Scotia) The Prince Edward Island Regiment (RCAC) (armoured) (Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island) 1st (Halifax-Dartmouth) Field Artillery Regiment, RCA (artillery) (Halifax, Nova Scotia) 84th Independent Field Battery, RCA (artillery) (Yarmouth, Nova Scotia) 45 Engineer Squadron (combat engineer) (Sydney, Nova Scotia) The Princess Louise Fusiliers (light infantry) (Halifax, Nova Scotia) The West Nova Scotia Regiment (light infantry) (Aldershot, Nova Scotia) The Nova Scotia Highlanders (light infantry) (Truro, Nova Scotia) The Cape Breton Highlanders (light infantry) (Sydney, Nova Scotia) 36 Service Battalion (service and support) (Halifax and Sydney, Nova Scotia) { 37 Canadian Brigade Group } 37 Canadian Brigade Group Headquarters 8th Canadian Hussars (Princess Louise&apos;s) (armoured) (Moncton, New Brunswick) 3rd Field Artillery Regiment, RCA (artillery) (Saint John, New Brunswick) 56 Engineer Squadron (combat engineer) (St. John&apos;s, Newfoundland and Labrador) 1st Battalion, The Royal New Brunswick Regiment (Carleton and York) (light infantry) (Fredericton, New Brunswick) 2nd Battalion, The Royal New Brunswick Regiment (North Shore) (light infantry) (Bathurst, New Brunswick) 1st Battalion, Royal Newfoundland Regiment (light infantry) (St. John&apos;s, Newfoundland and Labrador) 2nd Battalion, Royal Newfoundland Regiment (light infantry) (Corner Brook, Newfoundland and Labrador) 37 Service Battalion (service and support) (Saint John, New Brunswick and St. John&apos;s, Newfoundland and Labrador) { 72 Communications Group - Halifax, Nova Scotia } 721 Communication Regiment (Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island) 722 Communication Squadron (Saint John, New Brunswick) 723 Communication Squadron (Halifax, Nova Scotia) 724 Communication Squadron - active unit (Oromocto, New Brunswick) 725 Communication Squadron (Glace Bay, Nova Scotia) 728 Communication Squadron (St. John&apos;s, Newfoundland and Labrador) { 5 Canadian Ranger Patrol Group (Gander, Newfoundland and Labrador) } { 3 Intelligence Company (Halifax, Nova Scotia) } { 3 Military Police Regiment (Canada) Lower Sackville, Nova Scotia } { Land Force Quebec Area } 34 Canadian Brigade Group Headquarters (Montreal) The Royal Canadian Hussars (Montreal) (Armoured) (Montreal) Le Régiment de Hull (RCAC) (Armoured) (Hull) 4 e Bataillon, Royal 22 e Régiment (Light Infantry) (Laval) 6 e Bataillon, Royal 22 e Régiment (Light Infantry) (Saint-Hyacinthe) Le Régiment de Maisonneuve (Light Infantry) (Montreal) Les Fusiliers Mont-Royal (Light Infantry) (Montreal) The Black Watch (Royal Highland Regiment) of Canada (Light Infantry) (Montreal) The Canadian Grenadier Guards (Light Infantry) (Westmount) The Canadian Grenadier Guards (Light Infantry) (Montreal) The Royal Montreal Regiment (Light Infantry) (Westmount) 2nd Field Artillery Regiment, RCA (Artillery) (Montreal) 34 Combat Engineer Regiment (Combat Engineer) (Westmount) 34 Service Battalion (Service and Support) (Saint-Hubert) 34th Signals Regiment (Montreal) Signals (Support) (Montreal) { 35 Canadian Brigade Group } 35 Canadian Brigade Group Headquarters Sherbrooke Hussars (Armoured) (Sherbrooke) 12 e Régiment blindé du Canada (Militia) (armoured) (Trois-Rivières) Le Régiment de la Chaudière (Light Infantry) (Lévis) Le Régiment du Saguenay (Light Infantry) (Chicoutimi) Les Fusiliers de Sherbrooke (Light Infantry) (Sherbrooke) Les Fusiliers du Saint-Laurent (Light Infantry) (Rimouski) Les Voltigeurs de Québec (Light Infantry) (Quebec City) 6 e Régiment d&apos;artillerie de Campagne, ARC (Artillery) (Lévis) 62 e Régiment d&apos;artillerie de campagne, ARC (Artillery) (Shawinigan) 35 Combat Engineer Regiment (Combat Engineer) (Quebec City) 35 (Quebec) Service Battalion (Service and Support) (Quebec City) { 71 e Communications Group (Montreal) } 712 Communication Squadron - Montreal 713 Communication Regiment - Beaport 714 Communication Squadron - Sherbrooke { 2 Canadian Ranger Patrol Group - Richelain } { 4 Intelligence Company - Montreal } { Land Force Central Area } 31 Canadian Brigade Group Headquarters (London, Ontario) 1st Hussars (Armoured) (London and Sarnia, Ontario) The Windsor Regiment (Armoured) (Windsor, Ontario) The Royal Hamilton Light Infantry (Wentworth Regiment) (Light Infantry) (Hamilton, Ontario) The Lincoln and Welland Regiment (Light Infantry) (St. Catharines and Welland, Ontario) 4th Battalion, The Royal Canadian Regiment (Light Infantry) (London and Stratford, Ontario) The Royal Highland Fusiliers of Canada (Light Infantry) (Cambridge and Kitchener, Ontario) The Essex and Kent Scottish (Light Infantry) (Windsor and Chatham, Ontario) The Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders of Canada (Princess Louise&apos;s) (Light Infantry) (Hamilton, Ontario) 11th Field Artillery Regiment, RCA (Artillery) (Guelph and Hamilton, Ontario) 56th Field Artillery Regiment, RCA (Artillery) (Brantford,St. Catharines and Simcoe Ontario) 31 Combat Engineer Regiment (The Elgins) (Combat Engineer) (St. Thomas and Waterloo, Ontario) 31 Service Battalion (Service and Support) (Windsor, London and Hamilton, Ontario) { 32 Canadian Brigade Group } 32 Canadian Brigade Group Headquarters (Toronto) The Governor General&apos;s Horse Guards (Armoured) (Toronto) The Queen&apos;s York Rangers (1st American Regiment) RCAC (Armoured) (Toronto and Aurora, Ontario) The Queen&apos;s Own Rifles of Canada (Light Infantry) (Toronto (Downtown and Scarborough), Ontario) The Royal Regiment of Canada (Light Infantry) (Toronto, Ontario) The Grey and Simcoe Foresters (Light Infantry (Owen Sound and Barrie, Ontario) The Lorne Scots (Peel, Dufferin and Halton Regiment) (Light Infantry) (Brampton, Oakville and Georgetown, Ontario) 48th Highlanders of Canada (Light Infantry) (Toronto, Ontario) The Toronto Scottish Regiment (Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother&apos;s Own) (Light Infantry) (Toronto, Ontario) 7th Toronto Regiment, RCA (Artillery) (Toronto, Ontario) 32 Combat Engineer Regiment (Combat Engineer) (Toronto, Ontario) 32 (Toronto) Service Battalion (Service and Support) (Toronto, Ontario) { 33 Canadian Brigade Group } 33 Canadian Brigade Group Headquarters (Ottawa, Ontario) The Ontario Regiment (RCAC) (Armoured) (Oshawa, Ontario) Governor General&apos;s Foot Guards (Light Infantry) (Ottawa, Ontario) The Princess of Wales&apos; Own Regiment (Light Infantry) (Kingston, Ontario) The Hastings and Prince Edward Regiment (Light Infantry) (Belleville, Peterborough and Cobourg, Ontario) The Brockville Rifles (Light Infantry) (Brockville, Ontario) Stormont, Dundas and Glengarry Highlanders (Light Infantry) (Cornwall, Ontario) The Cameron Highlanders of Ottawa (Light Infantry) (Ottawa, Ontario) The Algonquin Regiment (Light Infantry) (North Bay and Timmins, Ontario) 2nd Battalion, Irish Regiment of Canada (Light Infantry) (Sudbury, Ontario) 30th Field Artillery Regiment, RCA (Artillery) (Ottawa, Ontario) 49th (Sault Ste. Marie) Field Artillery Regiment, RCA (Artillery) (Sault Ste Marie, Ontario) 1st Air Defence Regiment (Lanark &amp; Renfrew Scottish), RCA (Air Defence Artillery) (Pembroke, Ontario) 33 Combat Engineer Regiment (Combat Engineer) (Ottawa, Ontario) 33 Service Battalion (Service and Support) (North Bay, Ottawa and Sault Ste. Marie Ontario) { 2 Operational Support Group (Toronto, Ontario) } 700 Communication Squadron (Borden, Ontario) 705 Communication Squadron (Hamilton, Ontario) 709 Communication Regiment (Toronto, Ontario) 763 communication Regiment (Ottawa, Ontario) 772 Electronic Warfare Squadron (Kingston, Ontario) { 3 Canadian Ranger Patrol Group (Borden, Ontario) } { 2 Intelligence Company (Toronto, Ontario) } { 2 Intelligence Platoon (Ottawa, Ontario) } { Land Force Western Area } 38 Canadian Brigade Group Headquarters (Winnipeg, Manitoba) The Saskatchewan Dragoons (Armoured) (Moose Jaw, Saskatchewan) The Fort Garry Horse (Armoured) (Winnipeg, Manitoba) The Royal Regina Rifles (Light Infantry) (Regina, Saskatchewan) The North Saskatchewan Regiment (Light Infantry) (Saskatoon, Saskatchewan) The Royal Winnipeg Rifles (Light Infantry) (Winnipeg, Manitoba) The Lake Superior Scottish Regiment (Light Infantry) (Thunder Bay, Ontario) The Queen&apos;s Own Cameron Highlanders of Canada (Light Infantry) (Winnipeg) 10th Field Artillery Regiment, RCA (Artillery) (Regina, Saskatchewan) 26th Field Artillery Regiment, RCA (Artillery) (Brandon, Manitoba) 116th Independent Field Battery (Artillery) (Kenora, Ontario) 38 Signals Regiment (Communications) (Winnipeg, Manitoba, Thunder Bay, Ontario and Saskatoon and Regina, Saskatchewan) 38 Service Battalion (Service and Support) (Regina, Saskatchewan, Winnipeg, Manitoba and Thunder Bay, Ontario) { 39 Canadian Brigade Group } 39 Canadian Brigade Group Headquarters (Vancouver, British Columbia) The British Columbia Regiment (Duke of Connaught&apos;s Own) (Armoured) (Vancouver, British Columbia) The British Columbia Dragoons (Armoured) (Kelowna, British Columbia) The Rocky Mountain Rangers (Light Infantry) (Kamloops, British Columbia) The Royal Westminster Regiment (Light Infantry) (New Westminster, British Columbia) The Seaforth Highlanders of Canada (Light Infantry) (Vancouver, British Columbia) The Canadian Scottish Regiment (Princess Mary&apos;s) (Light Infantry) (Victoria, British Columbia) 5th (British Columbia) Field Regiment, RCA (Artillery) (Victoria, British Columbia) 15th Field Regiment, RCA (Artillery) (Vancouver, British Columbia) 39 Combat Engineer Regiment (Combat Engineer) (Vancouver, Chilliwack and Trail, British Columbia) 39 Signals Regiment (Communications) (Vancouver, Victoria and Nanaimo, British Columbia) 39 Canadian Brigade Group - The Army Reserve in British Columbia, published by the authority of the Brigade Commander, 39 Canadian Brigade Group, Vancouver, September 2011 39 Service Battalion (Service and Support) (Victoria and Vancouver, British Columbia) { 41 Canadian Brigade Group } 41 Canadian Brigade Group Headquarters (Calgary, Alberta) The South Alberta Light Horse (Armoured) (Edmonton and Medicine Hat, Alberta) The King&apos;s Own Calgary Regiment (RCAC) (Armoured) (Calgary, Alberta) The Loyal Edmonton Regiment (4th Battalion, Princess Patricia&apos;s Canadian Light Infantry) (Light Infantry) (Edmonton, Alberta, and Yellowknife, N.W.T.) The Calgary Highlanders (Light Infantry) (Calgary, Alberta) 20th Field Regiment, Royal Canadian Artillery (Artillery) (Edmonton and Red Deer, Alberta) 20th Independent Field Battery, RCA (Artillery) (Lethbridge, Alberta) 41 Combat Engineer Regiment (Combat Engineer) (Edmonton, Alberta) 41 Signals Regiment (Communications) (Edmonton, Calgary and Red Deer, Alberta) 41 Service Battalion (Service and Support) (Calgary and Edmonton, Alberta) { 73 Communications Group } 731 Communication Squadron - Active Unit (CFB Shilo) 742 Communication Squadron - Active Unit (CFB Edmonton) { 4 Canadian Ranger Patrol Group (Victoria, British Columbia) } { 6 Intelligence Company (Edmonton, Alberta, Vancouver, British Columbia and Winnipeg, Manitoba) } [ Army bases and training centres ] [ January 2010 ] CFB Edmonton CFB Suffield LFWA TC Wainwright CFB-TC Shilo CFB Kingston CFB Borden CFB Petawawa ArmyATC Meaford Canadian Forces Land Advanced Warfare Centre - Trenton Four Mile Point Live Firing Range - Niagara-on-the-Lake Connaught Range and Primary Reserve Training Centre CFB Montreal CFB Valcartier CFLRS/ELRFC Saint-Jean Farnham Garrison, Quebec (CFLRS outdoor education centre and rifle ranges) CFB Gagetown (CTC) LFAATC Aldershot Land Force Western Area Land Force Central Area Land Force Quebec Area Land Force Atlantic Area Alberta Manitoba Ontario Quebec New Brunswick Nova Scotia [ Equipment ] [ January 2010 ] [ List of modern Canadian Army equipment Future Canadian Forces projects List of infantry weapons and equipment of the Canadian military ] [ November 2010 ] Canada is an industrial nation with a highly developed science and technology sector. Since the First World War, Canada has produced its own infantry fighting vehicle, anti-tank guided missile and small arms for the Army. Regular and reserve units operate state-of-the-art equipment able to handle modern threats through 2030–2035. Despite extensive financial cuts to the defence budget between 1960s–2000s, the Army is relatively well equipped. { Lance W. Roberts (2005) &apos;&apos;9.3 Military Forces&apos;&apos;, Recent social trends in Canada, 1960-2000, McGill-Queen&apos;s University Press, pp.372-376. } The Army currently operates approximatively 10,500 utility vehicles including G-wagon and 7000-MV and also operates approximately 2,700 armoured fighting vehicles including the LAV-III and the Leopard 2. { Equipment: Vehicles, www.army.forces.gc.ca } The Army also operates approximatively 150 field artillery pieces including the M777 howitzer and the LG1 Mark II. { Equipment: Weapons, www.army.forces.gc.ca } { Coyote Reconnaissance Vehicle from the } { 12 e Régiment blindé du Canada } In the near future between 2011 to 2017 (see also the list of Future Canadian Forces projects ), the Army will receive a new family of combat vehicles including 138 close combat vehicles meant to accompany the main battle tank into combat and to increase combat capabilities of Army. Army will also receive a new family of tactical armoured patrol vehicles which will eventually replace the RG-31 Nyala and Coyote Reconnaissance Vehicle. The dismounted soldiers will be equipped with the long-awaited Integrated Soldier System designed to improve command execution, target acquisition and situational awareness. Army will receive a new family of engineering vehicles especially designed to clear pathways for troops and other vehicles through minefields and along roadside bombs and improvised explosive device s. This new family of vehicles will eventually replace the aging fleet of AEV Badger, ARV Taurus and AVLB Beaver. Army infantry uses the C7 Rifle or C8 Carbine as the basic assault rifle, with grenadiers using the C7 with an attached M203 grenade launcher, and the C9 squad automatic weapon. Newer variants of the C7/C8 family have since been integrated into common use throughout the Canadian Forces. The C7 has most recently been updated in the form the C7A2. The major internal components remain the same, however, several changes have been made to increase versatility of the rifle. Changes include adding a TRI-Ad rail mount system to the front iron sight which allows accessories such as laser designators and tac lights to be added. Also, the fire control selector lever has been made ambidextrous in addition to the cocking lever. A much needed 4-position telescopic butt-stock has been added to better accommodate different sized shooters. But, perhaps most obviously the rifle has undergone some aesthetic changes, moving away from the traditional all black rifle to one with olive green in the hand guards, pistol grip and sight cover. [ Canadian Forces Assault Rifle http://www.canadianforcesmilitary.com/c7a1_assault_rifle.html 2008 ] [ Uniforms, load bearing and protective equipment ] [ Uniforms of the Canadian Forces Battledress#Canada Battledress ] Canada&apos;s battledress developed parallel to that of the British from 1900 to 1968, though always with significant differences, and then increasingly followed the American pattern of separate uniforms for separate functions, becoming distinctively &quot; Canadian &quot; in the process. Prior to unification in 1968, the uniforms of the Royal Canadian Navy (RCN), Canadian Army, and Royal Canadian Air Force (RCAF) were similar to their counterparts in the forces of the United Kingdom and other Commonwealth countries, save for national identifiers and some regimental accoutrements. With unification in 1968 all branches started wearing a new rifle green coloured service uniform. The present distinctive environmental uniforms in different colours for the navy, army and air force were introduced in the late 1980s and have a different cut and colour than their pre-1968 counterparts. { Royal Canadian Regiment } [ Meals ] Field kitchens and catering are used to feed members of the Canadian Army personnel at bases and overseas operation centres. For personnel on patrol away from bases, they are supplied Individual Meal Pack.The IMP (Individual Meal Pack) is used by the Canadian Forces and Canadian cadets. Other types of rations are used by the Canadian Forces, notably fresh rations, or cooked meals provided directly from the kitchen or by haybox. There are also patrol packs, which are small high-protein snack-type foods (such as beef jerky or shredded cheese) and boxed lunches (consisting of assorted sandwiches, juice, fruit, pasta and a dessert) provided for soldiers to consume in situations in which meal preparation is not possible. [ Rank structure ] [ Canadian Forces ranks and insignia ] Comparison of ranking structure available at Ranks and insignia of NATO. Not shown are the various appointment badges for specialist positions such as master gunner, drum major, etc. Many ranks are associated with specific appointments; for example a regimental sergeant major is usually a chief warrant officer. The title of master corporal also, technically, refers to an appointment and not a rank. Some ranks may have different names depending on the customary tradition of certain army corps, and may not appear here. Two commonly heard examples are the rank of Sapper, referring to a trained private in the combat engineers, and Trooper, referring to a trained private in the armoured trade. In addition, in the artillery, the ranks Trained Private through Master Corporal are represented by Gunner, Bombardier, and Master Bombardier respectively. [ Insignia ] Commander-in-Chief Commander-in-Chief 200px Officers [ Canada ] {Ranks and Insignia of NATO Armies/OF/Blank}} Canada No Equivalent General Lieutenant General Major General Brigadier General Colonel Lieutenant Colonel Major Captain Lieutenant Second Lieutenant No Equivalent Officer Cadet Général Lieutenant-général Major-général Brigadier-général Colonel Lieutenant-colonel Major Capitaine Lieutenant Sous-lieutenant Élève-Officier 50px 50px 50px 50px 50px 50px 50px 50px 50px 50px 50px Non-Commissioned [ Canada ] {Ranks and Insignia of NATO Armies/OR/Blank}} Canada 50px 50px 50px 50px 50px 50px 50px 50px Chief Warrant Officer Master Warrant Officer Warrant Officer Sergeant Master Corporal Corporal Private Private Recruit Adjudant- chef Adjudant- maître Adjudant Sergent Caporal- chef Caporal Soldat Soldat Recrue [ Battles involving the Canadian Army ] [ Category:Battles involving Canada ] The Canadian Army has participated in the following campaigns as a combatant: Battle of Paardeberg Battle of Leliefontein Second Battle of Ypres Battle of Somme Vimy Ridge Passchendaele Hundred Days Offensive Dieppe Raid Juno Beach Operation Market Garden Battle of Normandy Battle of the Scheldt Battle of the Rhineland Battle of Groningen Battle of Kapyong Operation Anaconda Operation Apollo Operation Mountain Thrust Operation Medusa Battle of Panjwaii Operation Falcon&apos;s Summit Siege of Sangin Operation Achilles Operation Hoover Operation Moshtarak Second Boer War First World War Second World War Korean War Afghanistan Siberian Expedition Note: The Canadian army was involved in the battle of the Medak Pocket, but actual type of involvement is under dispute [ Publications ] Canadian Military Journal Canadian Army Journal [ See also ] [ Canadian Armed Forces ] History of the Canadian Army Canadian Forces Canadian Special Operations Forces Command Regimental nicknames of the Canadian Forces Intelligence Branch (Canadian Forces) Permanent Active Militia Non-Permanent Active Militia Primary Reserve [ References ] [ External links ] [ Canadian Forces Army ] Canadian Army Website - Official website of the Canadian Army Faces of War: The Canadian Army at Library and Archives Canada army.ca - Army.ca a web forum and interactive wiki dealing with both current and historical issues related to the Canadian Army. Battle Honours in the Canadian Army by J.R. Grodzinski Canadiansoldiers.com Category:Canadian Forces Category:Canadian Army [ fr ] de:Canadian Army es:Ejército canadiense fr:Armée canadienne it:Canadian Army ja:カナダ陸軍 pl:Canadian Army pt:Comando das Forças Terrestres Canadenses ru:Армия Канады simple:Canadian Forces Land Force Command