[ February 2012 ] [ yes 1815 6 1 ] { Salzburg, } { Bavaria } [ yes 1867 7 26 1815 6 1 ] { Bamberg, } { Bavaria } { Theatinerkirche, Munich } { Roman Catholicism } Otto, Royal Prince of Bavaria, then Othon, King of Greece ( [ Ὄθων, Βασιλεὺς τῆς Ἑλλάδος ], Óthon, Vasiléfs tis Elládos; 1 June 1815  – 26 July 1867) was made the first modern King of Greece in 1832 under the Convention of London, whereby Greece became a new kingdom under the protection of the Great Powers (the United Kingdom, France and the Russian Empire ). The second son of the philhellene King Ludwig I of Bavaria, Otto ascended the newly created throne of Greece while still a minor. His government was initially run by a three-man regency council made up of Bavarian court officials. Upon reaching his majority, Otto removed the regents when they proved unpopular with the people and he ruled as an absolute monarch. Eventually his subjects’ demands for a Constitution proved overwhelming and in the face of an armed but peaceful insurrection, Otto granted a Constitution in 1843. Throughout his reign, Otto faced political challenges concerning Greece&apos;s financial weakness and the role of the government in the affairs of the Church. The politics of Greece of this era was based on affiliations with the three Great Powers, and Otto’s ability to maintain the support of the powers was key to his remaining in power. To remain strong, Otto had to play the interests of each of the Great Powers’ Greek adherents against the others, while not aggravating the Great Powers. When Greece was blockaded by the (British) Royal Navy in 1850 and again in 1853, to stop Greece from attacking the Ottoman Empire during the Crimean War, Otto’s standing amongst Greeks suffered. As a result, there was an assassination attempt on the Queen and finally, in 1862, Otto was deposed while in the countryside. He died in exile in Bavaria in 1867. [ Early life and reign ] thumb He was born Prince Otto Friedrich Ludwig of Bavaria at Schloss Mirabell in Salzburg (when it belonged for a short time to the Kingdom of Bavaria ), [ http://www.salzburger-schlosskonzerte.at/en/Schloss_Mirabell.htm Salzburger Schlosskonzerte website Salzburger-schlosskonzerte.at 11 July 2010 ] as second son of King Ludwig I of Bavaria and Therese of Saxe-Hildburghausen. Through his ancestor, the Bavarian Duke John II, Otto was a descendant of the Greek imperial dynasties of Komnenos and Laskaris. When he was elected king, the Great Powers extracted a pledge from Otto’s father to restrain him from hostile actions against the Ottoman Empire, and insisted on his title being that of “King of Greece” instead of “King of the Greeks”, which would imply a claim over the millions of Greeks then still under Turkish rule. Not quite 18, the young prince arrived in Greece with 3,500 Bavarian troops and three Bavarian advisors aboard the British frigate HMS &apos;&apos;Madagascar&apos;&apos;. He immediately endeared himself to his adopted country by adopting the Greek national costume and Hellenizing his name to &quot; Othon. &quot; For this reason, some English sources call him &quot; Otho. &quot; ( &quot; Othon &quot; is also the French, Spanish and Portuguese version of the German name &quot; Otto &quot; ). Otto in his youth. Otto&apos;s reign is usually divided into 3 periods: a. The years of Regency : 1832-1835 b. The years of Absolute Monarchy : 1835-1843 c. The years of Constitutional Monarchy : 1843-1862 The Bavarian advisors were arrayed in a Regency Council headed by Count Josef Ludwig von Armansperg, who in Bavaria as minister of finance, had recently succeeded in restoring Bavaria n credit at the cost of his popularity. Von Armansperg was the President of the Privy Council and the 1st representative (or Prime Minister) of the new Greek government. The other members of the Regency Council were Karl von Abel and Georg Ludwig von Maurer with whom von Armansperg clashed often. After the King reached his majority in 1835, von Armansperg was made Arch-Secretary but was called Arch-Chancellor by the Greek press. { Kingdom of Greece as laid down in the treaty of 1832 (in dark blue). } Britain and the Rothschild bank, who were underwriting the Greek loans, insisted on financial stringency from Armansperg. The Greeks were soon more heavily taxed than under Turkish rule; { Petropulos, John A., Politics and Statecraft in the Kingdom of Greece(Princeton University Press, 1968) } as the people saw it, they had exchanged a hated Ottoman tyranny, which they understood, for government by a foreign bureaucracy, the &quot; Bavarocracy &quot; (Βαυαροκρατία), which they despised. (Ottoman rule had been called in Greek Tourkokratia - Τουρκοκρατία, &quot; Turkish rule &quot; ). In addition, the regency showed little respect for local customs. Also, as a Roman Catholic, Otto himself was viewed as a heretic by many pious Greeks, however, his heir s would have to be Orthodox according to the terms of the 1843 Constitution. { Clogg, Richard; A Short History of Modern Greece; Cambridge University Press, 1979; ISBN 0-521-32837-3 } Popular heroes and leaders of the Greek Revolution, like the Generals Theodoros Kolokotronis and Yiannis Makriyiannis, who opposed the Bavarian-dominated regency, were charged with treason, put in jail and sentenced to death. However, they were pardoned later, under popular pressure, while the Greek judges, who resisted the Bavarian pressure and refused to sign the death penalties (like Anastasios Polyzoidis and Georgios Tertsetis ), were saluted as heroes. King Otto’s early reign was notable for one more reason: He moved the capital of Greece from Nafplion to Athens. His first task as king was to make a detailed archaeological and topographical survey of Athens. He assigned Gustav Eduard Schaubert and Stamatios Kleanthis [ Tung Anthony Anthony Tung Preserving the World&apos;s Great Cities: The Destruction and Renewal of the Historic Metropolis Three RIvers Press 2001 New York 256–260 0-609-80815-X ] to complete this task. At that time Athens had a population of roughly 4,000–5,000 people, located mainly in what today covers the district of Plaka in Athens. { Peter von Hess, 1839. } Athens was chosen as the Greek capital for historical and sentimental reasons, not because it was a large city. A modern city plan was laid out and public buildings erected. The finest legacy of this period are the buildings of the University of Athens (1837), the Athens Polytechnic University (1837, under the name Royal School of Arts), the National Gardens of Athens (1840), the National Library of Greece (1842), the Old Royal Palace (now the Greek Parliament Building, 1843), and the Old Parliament Building (1858). Schools and hospitals were established all over the (still small) Greek dominion; but the negative feelings of the people were rather neglecting this side of his reign. In 1836-37, Otto visited Germany and married the beautiful and talented 17 year old, Duchess Amalia (Amelie) of Oldenburg (21 December 1818 – 20 May 1875). The wedding took place not in Greece, but in Oldenburg, on 22 November 1836; the marriage did not produce an heir and the new queen made herself unpopular by interfering in the government. Besides, she remained Protestant. Otto was unfaithful to his wife, and had a liaison with Jane Digby, a notorious woman his father had previously taken as a lover. { Lovell, Mary S., A Scandalous Life: The Biography of Jane Digby (Fourth Estate, 1996) ISBN 978-1-85702-469-2 } Meanwhile, due to his overtly undermining the king, Armansperg was dismissed from his duties by King Otto immediately on his return. However, despite high hopes by the Greeks, the Bavarian Rundhart was appointed chief minister and the granting of a Constitution was again postponed. The attempts of Otto to conciliate Greek sentiment by efforts to enlarge the frontiers of his kingdom, for example, by the suggested acquisition of Crete in 1841, failed in their objective and only succeeded in embroiling him with the Great Powers. [ May 2009 ] [ Parties, finances and the church ] [ Early Greek Parties ] Coat of Arms of the Kingdom of Greece during the reign of King Otto (1833-1862). The Royal Standard. Throughout his reign, King Otto found himself confronted by a recurring series of issues: partisanship of the Greeks, financial uncertainty, and ecclesiastical issues. Greek parties in the Othonian era were based on two factors: the political activities of the diplomatic representatives of the Great Powers : Russia, United Kingdom and France and the affiliation of Greek political figures with these diplomats. [ May 2009 ] { Gottlieb Bodmer. } Financial uncertainty of the Othonian monarchy was the result of 1) Greece&apos;s poverty, 2) the concentration of land in the hands of a small number of wealthy “primates” like the Mavromichalis family of Mani, and 3) the promise of 60,000,000 francs in loans from the Great Powers, which kept these nations involved in Greek internal affairs and the Crown constantly seeking to please one or the other power to ensure the flow of funds. The political machinations of the Great Powers were personified in their three legates in Athens: the French Theobald Piscatory, the Russian Gabriel Catacazy, and the English Edmund Lyons. They informed their home governments on the activities of the Greeks, while serving as advisers to their respective allied parties within Greece. Otto pursued policies, such as balancing power among all the parties and sharing offices among the parties, ostensibly to reduce the power of the parties while trying to bring a pro-Othon party into being. The parties, however, became the entree into government power and financial stability. The effect of his (and his advisors&apos;) policies was to make the Great Powers’ parties more powerful, not less. The Great Powers did not support curtailing Otto’s increasing absolutism, however, which resulted in a near permanent conflict between Otto’s absolute monarchy and the power bases of his Greek subjects. Otto found himself confronted by a number of intractable ecclesiastical issues: 1) monasticism, 2) Autocephaly, 3) the king as head of the Church and 4) toleration of other churches. His regents, Armansperg and Rundhart, established a controversial policy of suppressing the monasteries. This was very upsetting to the Church hierarchy. Russia was self-considered as stalwart defender of Orthodoxy but Orthodox believers were found in all three parties. Once he rid himself of his Bavarian advisers, Otto allowed the statutory dissolution of the monasteries to lapse. By tradition dated back to the Byzantine era, the king was regarded by the Church as part of her head. On the issue of Church&apos;s Autocephaly and his role as king within the Church, Otto was overwhelmed by the arcana of Orthodox Church doctrine and popular discontent with his Roman Catholicism (while the Queen was Protestant). In 1833, the regents had unilaterally declared the Autocephaly of the Church of Greece.This was a recognition of the de facto political situation, as the Patriarch of Constantinople was partially under the political control of the Ottoman Empire. However, faithful people - concerned that having a Catholic as the head of the Church of Greece would weaken the Orthodox Church - criticised the unilateral declaration of Autocephaly as non-canonical. For the same reason, they likewise resisted the foreign, mostly Protestant, missionaries who established schools throughout Greece. Tolerance of other religions was over-supported by some in the English Party and others educated in the West as a symbol of Greece’s progress as a liberal European state. In the end, power over the Church and education was ceded to the Russian Party, while the King maintained a veto over the decision of the Synod of Bishops. This was to keep balance and avoid discrediting Greece in the eyes of Western Europe as a backward, religiously intolerant society. Actually Greek society was very tolerant to other religions. But after 400 years of religious oppression by the Ottomans, Greeks were very suspicious of imposed &quot; Liberal European progress &quot;. Such forced &quot; progress &quot; was viewed as one more attempt against their faith and against their own understanding of freedom, as the main motto of the Greek Revolution was &quot; for the holy faith of Christ and the freedom of the homeland &quot;; home and faith were inseparable, given also that the Church was the main contributor to the survival of the Greek language and Greek consciousness during Turkish occupation. Catholic communities were already established in Greece since the 13th century (Athens, Cyclades, Chios, Crete). Jewish communities also existed in the country, those arriving after the Expulsion of the Jews from Spain (1492) joining the earlier Romaniotes, Jews who had been living there since the times of Apostle Paul. { Bowman, &quot; The Jews of Greece &quot;, 421–422 (PDF) } Muslim families were still living in Greece during Otto&apos;s reign, since hostility was mainly against the Ottoman state and its depressive mechanisms and not against Muslim people. [ September 3, 1843 Revolution and later reign ] { 3 September 1843 Revolution. } Although King Otto tried to function as an absolute monarch, as Thomas Gallant writes, he “was neither ruthless enough to be feared, nor compassionate enough to be loved, nor competent enough to be respected.” { Gallant, Thomas W., Modern Greece (Oxford University Press, 2003) ISBN 0-340-76336-1 } By 1843, public dissatisfaction with him had reached crisis proportions and there were demands for a Constitution. Initially Otto refused to grant a Constitution, but as soon as Bavarian troops were withdrawn from the kingdom, a popular revolt was launched. On 3 September 1843, the infantry led by Colonel Dimitris Kallergis and the respected Revolutionary captain and former President of the Athens City Council General Yiannis Makriyiannis assembled in the Square in front of the Palace in Athens. Eventually joined by much of the population of the small capital, the rebellion refused to disperse until the King agreed to grant a Constitution, which would require that there be Greeks in the Council, that he convene a permanent National Assembly and that Otto personally thank the leaders of the uprising. Left with little recourse, now that his German troops were gone, King Otto gave in to the pressure and agreed to the demands of the crowd over the objections of his opinionated Queen. This square was renamed Constitution Square (Πλατεία Συντάγματος) to commemorate (until today) the events of September 1843 (and to feature many later tumultous events of Greek history). { Tompkinson, John L., Athens: The City (Anagnosis Books, 1996) ISBN 960-87186-0-0 } Now for the first time the king had Greeks in his Council and the French party, the English Party and the Russian Party (according to which of the Great Powers’ culture they most esteemed) vied for rank and power. The King’s prestige, which was based in large part on his support by the combined Great Powers, but mostly the support of the British, suffered in the Pacifico incident of 1850, when British Foreign Secretary Palmerston sent the British fleet to blockade the port of Piraeus with warships, to exact reparation for injustice done to a British subject. { Pacifico was a Jew of Portuguese nationality, merchant and the Portuguese Consul in Athens, who accidentally was also British citizen because he was born in Gibraltar. After a robbery in his shop he asked for compensation from the Greek state but nobody paid attention to him, not even the Portuguese government. Finally he asked for help from the British ambassador, and his case was turned into the blockade of the port of Piraeus by the British Fleet. } The Great Idea (Μεγάλη Ιδέα), the dream of uniting all Greek populations of the Ottoman Empire, thereby restoring the Byzantine Empire under Christian rule, led to his contemplating to enter the Crimean War at the side of Russia against Turkey and its British and French allies in 1853; the enterprise was unsuccessful, and resulted in renewed intervention by the two Great Powers and a second blockade of Piraeus port, forcing Greece to neutrality. In 1861, a student named Aristeidis Dosios (son of politician Konstantinos Dosios ) { Brekis, Spyros, L Ph.D.; Ίστορια της Νεώτερας Ελλάδος (History of Modern Greece) (in Greek) (2003) } attempted to murder Queen Amalia, and was openly hailed as a hero. His attempt, however, also prompted spontaneous feelings of monarchism and sympathy towards the royal couple among the Greek population. [ Succession ] It is well known that Otto was a great admirer of the rural Sarakatsani, a nomadic group of Greek mountain shepherds thought by some scholars to be descended from the Dorians. It is believed that at an early age he fathered an illegitimate child in the Sarakatsani clan named &quot; Tangas &quot;. [ Poulianos, Aris Ν. SARAKATSANI - THE MOST ANCIENT PEOPLE OF EUROPE 1993 ] This child was named Manoli Tangas, was brought to Athens and remained there after Otto&apos;s 1862 departure, living as a merchant trader with children of his own. The descendants of Manoli still reside in Athens today. [ http://en.sae.gr/?id%3D21728 SAE - Revival of Sarakatsani Caravan at the 22nd Panhellenic Sarakatsani Conference / World Council of Hellenes Abroad En.sae.gr 28 March 2011 1 October 2011 ] However, since Otto had no legitimate issue, he chose his brother as Crown Prince of Greece. It is often suggested that following his death, Prince Adalbert became the heir presumptive to the throne of Greece. In fact, rights to the Greek succession were passed onto his other older brother Luitpold, who technically succeeded to the Greek throne in 1867. Due to the renunciation of all the rights to the Greek succession by King Ludwig III, at Luitpold&apos;s death the rights to the throne of Greece were inherited by his second son, Prince Leopold. [ Exile and death ] { lithography. } Otto in Bavaria in 1865. While on a visit to the Peloponnese in 1862 a new coup was launched and this time a Provisional Government was set up and summoned a National Convention. Ambassadors of the Great Powers urged King Otto not to resist, and the king and queen took refuge on a British warship and returned to Bavaria the same way they had come to Greece (aboard a British warship), taking with them the Greek royal regalia which he had brought from Bavaria in 1832. It has been suggested that had Otto and Amalia borne an heir, then the King would not have been overthrown, as succession was also a major unresolved question at the time. { John Van der Kiste, Kings of the Hellenes (Sutton Publishing, 1994) ISBN 0-7509-2147-1 } It is also true, however, that the Constitution of 1843 made provision for his succession by his two younger brothers and their descendants. He died in the palace of the former bishops of Bamberg, Germany, and was buried in the Theatiner Church in Munich. During his retirement, he would still wear the traditional uniform nowadays worn only by the evzones (Presidential Guards). During the rebellion in Crete against the Ottoman Empire in 1866, Otto donated most of his fortune to support the revolt by supplying it with weapons. He also made provisions for his donation to be kept secret until his death, to avoid causing political problems to the new King, George I. It is generally accepted by historians that, although Otto failed, he deeply loved Greece as his own new homeland. His failure was mainly a result of the continuous intrigues and competition among the three Great Powers. Before his death, Otto asked to be buried in his own Greek traditional uniform. { For a better understanding of the situation in Greece and the attitude of the Greeks on Otto&apos;s reign, see article on his successor, } { George I of Greece. } [ Titles, styles and arms ] [ 85px King Othon of the Greeks His Majesty Your Majesty Sir ] [ Titles from birth to death ] 1 June 1815  – 6 February 1833: His Royal Highness Prince Otto Friedrich Ludwig of Bavaria 6 February 1833  – 23 October 1862: His Majesty Othon the First, by the Grace of God, King of Greece, Prince of Bavaria 23 October 1862  – 26 July 1867: His Majesty King Otto of Greece [ Ancestors ] [ 100% ] [ 1. Otto, King of Greece 2. Ludwig I of Bavaria 3. Therese of Saxe-Hildburghausen 4. Maximilian I Joseph of Bavaria 5. Augusta Wilhelmine of Hesse-Darmstadt 6. Frederick, Duke of Saxe-Altenburg 7. Duchess Charlotte Georgine of Mecklenburg-Strelitz 8. Frederick Michael of Zweibrücken-Birkenfeld 9. Maria Francisca of Sulzbach 10. Georg Wilhelm of Hesse-Darmstadt (=30) 11. Louise of Leiningen-Heidesheim (=31) 12. Ernst Frederick III, Duke of Saxe-Hildburghausen 13. Ernestine of Saxe-Weimar 14. Charles II, Grand Duke of Mecklenburg-Strelitz 15. Friederike Caroline Luise of Hesse-Darmstadt 16. Christian III, Count Palatine of Zweibrücken 17. Caroline of Nassau-Saarbrücken 18. Joseph Karl Emanuel August, Pfalzgraf von Sulzbach 19. Elizabeth Augusta Sophie, Pfalzgräfin von Neuburg 20. Louis VIII, Landgrave of Hesse-Darmstadt 21. Charlotte Christine Magdalene Johanna of Hanau-Lichtenberg 22. Christian Karl Reinhard, Count of Leiningen Dachsburg 23. Katharine Polyxene, Countess of Solms Rodelheim 24. Ernst Frederick II, Duke of Saxe-Hildburghausen 25. Caroline of Erbach-Fürstenau 26. Ernest August I, Duke of Saxe-Weimar 27. Sophie Charlotte of Brandenburg-Bayreuth 28. Charles I Ludwig Frederick of Mecklenburg-Strelitz 29. Elisabeth Albertine of Saxe-Hildburghausen 30. Georg Wilhelm of Hesse-Darmstadt (=10) 31. Louise of Leiningen-Heidesheim (=11) 24. Ernst Frederick II, Duke of Saxe-Hildburghausen 25. Caroline of Erbach-Fürstenau 26. Ernest August I, Duke of Saxe-Weimar 27. Sophie Charlotte of Brandenburg-Bayreuth 28. Charles I Ludwig Frederick of Mecklenburg-Strelitz 29. Elisabeth Albertine of Saxe-Hildburghausen 30. Georg Wilhelm of Hesse-Darmstadt (=10) 31. Louise of Leiningen-Heidesheim (=11) ] [ References ] [ 2 ] [ Bibliography ] Bower, Leonard, and Gordon Bolitho. Otho I, King of Greece: A Biography. London: Selwyn &amp; Blount, 1939 Dümler, Christian, and Kathrin Jung. Von Athen nach Bamberg: König Otto von Griechenland, Begleitheft zur Ausstellung in der Neuen Residenz Bamberg, 21. Juni bis 3. November 2002. München: Bayerische Schlösserverwaltung, 2002. ISBN 3-932982-45-2. Hyland, M. Amalie, 1818-1875: Herzogin von Oldenburg, Königin von Griechenland. Oldenburg: Isensee, 2004. ISBN 978-3-89995-122-6. Murken, Jan, and Saskia Durian-Ress. König-Otto-von-Griechenland-Museum der Gemeinde Ottobrunn. Bayerische Museen, Band 22. München: Weltkunst, 1995. ISBN 3-921669-16-2. [ External links ] [ Otto ] [ House of Wittelsbach 1 June 1815 26 July 1867 ] [ Augustinos Kapodistrias Governor of Greece ] [ King of Greece 1832–1862 ] [ George I King of the Hellenes ] [ N/A ] [ King of Greece 1862–1867 ] [ Luitpold ] [ Otto of Greece 1 June 1815 Salzburg, Bavaria 26 July 1867 Bamberg, Bavaria ] Category:1815 births Category:1867 deaths Category:19th-century monarchs in Europe Category:Burials at the Theatine Church, Munich Category:House of Wittelsbach Category:Kings of Greece Category:Knights of the Golden Fleece Category:People from Salzburg Category:People from Upper Franconia Category:Princes of Bavaria Category:Prime Ministers of Greece Category:History of Greece (1832–1862) af:Otto van Griekeland be:Атон, кароль Грэцыі bg:Отон I (Гърция) ca:Otó I de Grècia cs:Ota I. Řecký da:Otto 1. af Grækenland de:Otto (Griechenland) el:Όθων της Ελλάδας es:Otón I de Grecia eo:Otto la 1-a (Grekio) fr:Othon Ier de Grèce gl:Otto de Grecia ko:오톤 hi:ग्रीस के ओट्टो os:Оттон (Гречъы къарол) it:Ottone I di Grecia he:אותון, מלך יוון la:Otho (rex Graeciae) lv:Otto (Grieķija) hu:I. Ottó görög király mk:Ото I (Грција) nl:Otto I van Griekenland ja:オソン1世 no:Otto I av Hellas pl:Otton I Wittelsbach pt:Oto I da Grécia ro:Otto al Greciei ru:Оттон (король Греции) sr:Ото I Грчки fi:Otto (Kreikka) sq:Otto of Greece sv:Otto I av Grekland tr:Otto (Yunanistan) uk:Оттон I (король Греції) zh:奥托一世 (希腊)