[ May 2012 ] Symbol of the Joint Chiefs of Staff of the United States of America The Joint Chiefs of Staff and several Commanders in Chief, 1 July 1983 The Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS) is a body of senior uniformed leaders in the United States Department of Defense who advise the Secretary of Defense, the Homeland Security Council, the National Security Council and the President on military matters. The composition of the Joint Chiefs of Staff is defined by statute and consists of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (CJCS), Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (VCJCS), and the Military Service Chiefs from the Army, Navy, Air Force, the Marine Corps, and the Chief of the National Guard Bureau, [ http://www.armytimes.com/news/2012/01/army-air-force-top-guard-officer-joins-joint-chiefs-010412w/ Top Guard officer joins Joint Chiefs of Staff Army Times 4 January 1012 ] all appointed by the President following Senate confirmation. { 10 USC 151. Joint Chiefs of Staff: composition; functions } Each of the individual Military Service Chiefs, outside of their Joint Chiefs of Staff obligations, works directly for the Secretary of the Military Department concerned, i.e. Secretary of the Army, Secretary of the Navy, and the Secretary of the Air Force. { 10 U.S.C. §3033 } { 10 U.S.C. §5033 } { 10 U.S.C. §5043 } { 10 U.S.C. §8033 } Following the Goldwater-Nichols Act in 1986 the Joint Chiefs of Staff do not have operational command authority, neither individually nor collectively, as the chain of command goes from the President to the Secretary of Defense, and from the Secretary of Defense to the Commanders of the Combatant Commands. { 10 U.S.C. §162(b) } Goldwater-Nichols also created the office of Vice Chairman, and the Chairman is now designated as the principal military adviser to the Secretary of Defense, the Homeland Security Council, the National Security Council and to the President. { 10 U.S.C §151(b) } The Joint Staff (JS) is a headquarters staff in the Pentagon, composed of personnel from each of the four Department of Defense armed services, that assists the Chairman and the Vice Chairman in discharging their responsibilities and is managed by the Director of the Joint Staff (DJS) who is a Lieutenant General or Vice Admiral. { 10 U.S.C §155 } [ History ] [ Joint Board ] As the military of the United States grew in size following the American Civil War, joint military action between the Army and Navy became increasingly difficult. The joint Army and Navy cooperation were unsupportive at either the planning or operational level and were constrained over disagreements during the Spanish-American War in the Caribbean campaigns. { Allan R. Millett, Semper Fidelis: The History of the United States Marine Corps, 1980;pg. 269, para. 2. } The Joint Army and Navy Board was established in 1903 by President Theodore Roosevelt, comprising representatives from the military heads and chief planners of both the Navy&apos;s General Board and the Army&apos;s General Staff. The Joint Board acting as an &quot; advisory committee &quot; was created to plan joint operations and resolve problems of common rivalry between the two services. Yet, the Joint Board accomplished little as its charter gave it no authority to enforce its decisions. The Joint Board also lacked the ability to originate its own opinions and was thus limited to commenting only on the problems submitted to it by the Secretaries of War and Navy. As a result, the Joint Board had little to no impact on the manner the United States conducted World War I. After World War I, in 1919 the two Secretaries agreed to reestablish and revitalize the Joint Board. The mission of the General staff was to develop plans for mobilization for the next war; the US was always designated &quot; Blue &quot; and potential enemies were assigned various other colors. { p26 John H. Bradley, Thomas E. Griess, Jack W. Dice, } { United States Military Academy, Dept. of History: The Second World War: Asia and the Pacific Square One Publishers, Inc., 2002 } This time, the Joint Board’s membership would include the Chiefs of Staff, their deputies, and the Chief of War Plans Division for the Army and Director of Plans Division for the Navy. Under the Joint Board would be a staff called the Joint Planning Committee to serve the Board. Along with new membership, the Joint Board could initiate recommendations on its own initiative. However, the Joint Board still did not possess the legal authority to enforce its decisions. [ World War II ] In 1942, President of the United States Franklin D. Roosevelt and Prime Minister of the United Kingdom Winston Churchill established the Combined Chiefs of Staff (CCS) following the attack on Pearl Harbor and the United States&apos; entrance into World War II with discussions during the Arcadia Conference with its charter approved by President Roosevelt 21 April 1942. [ United States Army in World War II – The War Department – Washington Command Post: The Operations Division; Chapter VI. Organizing The High Command For World War II &quot; Development of the Joint and Combined Chiefs of Staff System &quot; Cline Ray S. 1990 Center Of Military History, United States Army, Washington, D. C. 98–104 http://www.history.army.mil/books/wwii/WCP/ChapterVI.htm#p98 5 January 2012 ] The CCS would serve as the supreme military body for strategic direction of the US- British Empire war effort. While the UK had the Chiefs of Staff Committee, the United States had no equivalent agency with which to provide the CCS with American services. Though the Joint Board did exist, its authority and services were of little use to the CCS. Although its 1935 publication, Joint Action of the Army and Navy, gave some guidance for the joint operations during World War II, the Joint Board held little influence in that war. Following the end of WWII, the Joint Board was officially disbanded in 1947. The Joint Chiefs of Staff was created, in part to present a common front to the British Chiefs of Staff, in early 1942 holding its first formal meeting on 9 February to coordinate U.S. military operations between War and Navy Departments. [ United States Army in World War II – The War Department – Global Logistics and Strategy 1940–1943 Leighton Richard M. Robert W Coakley 1995 Center Of Military History, United States Army, Washington, D. C. 144 http://www.history.army.mil/html/books/001/1-5/index.html 5 January 2012 ] To fill the need for a coordinated effort and to provide coordinated staff work, Admiral William D. Leahy proposed a concept of a &quot; unified high command &quot; in what would be called the Joint Chiefs of Staff. On 20 July 1942, Admiral Leahy became the Chief of Staff to the Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy ( &quot; Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy of the United States &quot; being the military title of the U.S. President, per Article II, § 2, of the Constitution), and created a staff of the chiefs of staff of the services to serve under him. While serving as Chairman or Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Chief of Staff of the Army, Chief of Naval Operations, Chief of Staff of the Air Force, Commandant of the Marine Corps, or Commandant of the Coast Guard, the salary is $20,263.50 a month, regardless of cumulative years of service computed under section 205 of title 37, United States Code.3. The first members of the Joint Chiefs of Staff were: [ http://books.google.com/books?id%3DUUAEAAAAMBAJ%26amp%3Blpg%3DPA2%26amp%3Bpg%3DPA95#v%3Donepage%26amp%3Bf%3Dtrue Washington Eats Life 5 October 1942 20 November 2011 95 ] Name Service Position Fleet Admiral William D. Leahy USN Chief of Staff to the Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy and Special Presidential Military Advisor General of the Army George C. Marshall USA Chief of Staff of the United States Army Fleet Admiral Ernest J. King USN Chief of Naval Operations and Commander in Chief of the United States Fleet General of the Army* Henry H. Arnold USAAF Deputy Army Chief of Staff for Air and Chief of the Army Air Forces Arnold was later appointed to the grade of General of the Air Force. His rank while serving as Chief of the Army Air Forces was General of the Army. [ National Security Act of 1947 ] US Joint Chiefs of Staff, November 1989 With the end of World War II, the Joint Chiefs of Staff was officially established under the National Security Act of 1947. Per the National Security Act, the JCS consisted of a Chairman, the Chief of Staff of the Army, the Chief of Staff of the Air Force (which was established as a separate service by the same Act), and the Chief of Naval Operations. The Commandant of the Marine Corps was to be consulted on matters concerning the Corps, but was not a regular member; General Lemuel C. Shepherd, Jr., Commandant in 1952–55, was the first to sit as an occasional member. The law was amended during the term of General Louis H. Wilson, Jr. (1975–79), making the Commandant a full-time JCS member in parity with the other three DoD services. The position of Vice Chairman was created by the Goldwater–Nichols Act of 1986 to complement the CJCS, as well as to delegate some of the Chairman&apos;s responsibilities, particularly resource allocation through the Joint Requirements Oversight Council (JROC). General Colin L. Powell (1989–93) was the first and, as of 2011, the only African American to serve on the Joint Chiefs of Staff. General Peter Pace (Vice Chairman 2001–05; Chairman, 2005–07) was the first Marine to serve in either position. No woman has ever served on the Joint Chiefs of Staff. [ National Defense Authorization Act of 2012 ] A provision in the 2012 National Defense Authorization Act added the Chief of the National Guard Bureau to the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Guard historians called it the &quot; most significant development &quot; for the National Guard since the Militia Act of 1903. [ Roles and responsibilities ] The Joint Chiefs of Staff, November 2002. After the 1986 reorganization of the military undertaken by the Goldwater-Nichols Act, the Joint Chiefs of Staff does not have operational command of U.S. military forces. Responsibility for conducting military operations goes from the President to the Secretary of Defense directly to the commanders of the Unified Combatant Command s and thus bypasses the Joint Chiefs of Staff completely. Today, their primary responsibility is to ensure the personnel readiness, policy, planning and training of their respective military services for the combatant commanders to utilize. The Joint Chiefs of Staff also act in a military advisory capacity for the President of the United States and the Secretary of Defense. In addition, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff acts as the chief military advisor to the President and the Secretary of Defense. In this strictly advisory role, the Joint Chiefs constitute the second-highest deliberatory body for military policy, after the National Security Council, which includes the President and other officials besides the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs. [ Current Members of the Joint Chiefs of Staff ] The Members of the Joint Chiefs of Staff: Position Name of current officeholder Service Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff General Martin Dempsey United States Army Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Admiral James A. Winnefeld, Jr. United States Navy Chief of Staff of the Army General Raymond T. Odierno United States Army Commandant of the Marine Corps General James F. Amos United States Marine Corps Chief of Naval Operations Admiral Jonathan W. Greenert United States Navy Chief of Staff of the Air Force General Norton A. Schwartz United States Air Force Chief of the National Guard Bureau General Craig R. McKinley http://www.nationalguard.mil/news/archives/2011/12/123011-Elevated.aspx United States Air Force Uniformed Service Chiefs not Members of the Joint Chiefs of Staff: Position Name of current officeholder Service Commandant of the Coast Guard Admiral Robert J. Papp, Jr. United States Coast Guard Surgeon General of the United States Vice Admiral Regina Benjamin United States Public Health Service Commissioned Corps Director, NOAA Commissioned Officer Corps Rear Admiral Jonathan W. Bailey National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Commissioned Corps Notes: The Joint Chiefs do not include the Commandant of the Coast Guard, Admiral Robert J. Papp, Jr. The Coast Guard is normally under the Department of Homeland Security, whereas the other four branches are under the Department of Defense. The Coast Guard may operate under the Department of the Navy during wartime. [ Leadership ] [ Chairman ] [ Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff ] The Joint Staff Organization Chart as of January 2012. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff is, by law, the highest ranking military officer of the United States armed forces, { 10 USC 152. Chairman: appointment; grade and rank } and the principal military adviser to the President of the United States. He leads the meetings and coordinates the efforts of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, comprising the Chairman, the Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Chiefs of Staff of the United States Army and United States Air Force, the Chief of Naval Operations, and the Commandant of the United States Marine Corps. The Joint Chiefs of Staff have offices in The Pentagon. The Chairman outranks all respective heads of each service branch, { 10 USC 152(c). Chairman: appointment; grade and rank – Grade and Rank. } but does not have command authority over them, their service branches or the Unified Combatant Command s. All combatant commanders receive operational orders directly from the Secretary of Defense { 10 USC 162. Combatant commands: assigned forces; chain of command } { Martin E. Dempsey, USA, 18th and current Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. } The current Chairman is General Martin E. Dempsey, USA, who began his term on 1 October 2011. On 20 July 1942, Navy Fleet Admiral William D. Leahy became the Chief of Staff to the Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy (20 July 1942 – 21 March 1949). He was not technically the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Leahy&apos;s office was the precursor to the post of Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. That post was established and first held by General of the Army Omar Bradley in 1949. [ Vice Chairman ] [ Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff ] { James A. Winnefeld, Jr., USN, 9th and current Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff } The position of Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff was created by the Goldwater-Nichols Act of 1986. The Vice Chairman is a four-star- general or admiral and, by law, is the second highest ranking member of the U.S. Armed Forces (after the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff ). In the absence of the Chairman, the Vice Chairman presides over the meetings of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. He may also perform such duties as the Chairman may prescribe. It was not until the National Defense Authorization Act in 1992 that the position was made a full voting member of the JCS. { About the Joint Chiefs } The current Vice Chairman is Admiral James A. Winnefeld, Jr., USN. [ Senior Enlisted Advisor to the Chairman ] [ Senior Enlisted Advisor to the Chairman ] { Bryan B. Battaglia, USMC, 2nd and current Senior Enlisted Advisor to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. } Command Sergeant Major William J. Gainey, USA, was selected to serve as the first Senior Enlisted Advisor to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (SEAC) beginning 1 Oct 2005. It was to be a newly-created position established to advise the Chairman on all matters involving enlisted personnel in a joint environment. The Senior Enlisted Advisor to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff is currently Sergeant Major Bryan B. Battaglia, USMC. Battaglia was sworn in by Joint Chiefs Chairman Gen. Martin Dempsey on 30 September 2011 in a ceremony at Joint Base Myer-Henderson Hall, Virginia. { http://www.defense.gov/news/newsarticle.aspx?id=65514 } The position had been vacant since CSM Gainey&apos;s retirement on 25 April 2008. As the SEA to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the SEAC is an advisor to the Chairman on all matters concerning joint and combined total force integration, utilization, and development. Additionally, the SEAC helps develop noncommissioned officers (NCOs)-related joint professional education, enhance utilization of senior NCOs on joint battle staffs, and support the Chairman’s responsibilities as directed. [ The Joint Staff ] The Joint Staff (JS), composed of personnel from all the four services, assists the Chairman and the Vice Chairman in discharging their responsibilities. They work closely with the Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD), the Military Department staffs, and the Combatant Command Staffs. [ Director of the Joint Staff ] The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff is assisted by the Director of the Joint Staff, a three-star officer who assists the Chairman with the management of the Joint Staff, an organization composed of approximately equal numbers of officers contributed by the Army, the Navy and Marine Corps, and the Air Force, who have been assigned to assist the Chairman in providing to the Secretary of Defense unified strategic direction, operation, and integration of the combatant land, naval, and air forces. [ Directorates of the Joint Staff ] The Joint Staff includes the following departments where all the planning, policies, intelligence, manpower, communications and logistics functions are translated into action. { jcs.mil } DOM – Directorate of Management J1 – Personnel and Manpower J2 – Intelligence – Rear Admiral Elizabeth L. Train J3 – Operations J4 – Logistics – Lieutenant General Brooks L. Bash J5 – Strategic Plans and Policy J6 – Directorate for Command, Control, Communications and Computer Systems J7 – Operational Plans and Joint Force Development J8 – Force Structure, Resources, and Assessment [ Joint Chiefs of Staff: Civilian Awards ] The Joint Chiefs may recognize private citizens, organizations or career civilian government employees for significant achievements provided to the joint community with one of the following decorations / awards. CJCS Award for Distinguished Public Service (DPS) CJCS Award for Outstanding Public Service (OPS) CJCS Joint Distinguished Civilian Service Award CJCS Joint Meritorious Civilian Service Award Joint Civilian Service Commendation Award (JCSCA) Joint Civilian Service Achievement Award (JCSAA) [ Coast Guard ] Although the Coast Guard is one of the five armed services of the United States, the Commandant of the Coast Guard is not a member of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. He is, however, entitled to the same supplemental pay as the Joint Chiefs, per 37 U.S.C. § 414(a)(5) ($4,000 per annum in 2009), and is accorded privilege of the floor under Senate Rule XXIII(1) as a de facto JCS member during Presidential addresses. In contrast to the Joint Chiefs—who are not in the military&apos;s operational chain of command—the Commandant of the Coast Guard commands his service. Coast Guard officers are legally eligible to be appointed as CJCS and VCJCS, per 10 U.S.C. 152(a)(1) &amp; 154(a)(1) respectively—which use the collective term &quot; armed forces &quot; rather than listing the eligible services – but none has been appointed to either position as of 2012. [ See also ] [ Military of the United States ] Armed Forces Council (Canada) Chiefs of Staff Committee (United Kingdom) Joint Chiefs of Staff (Republic of Korea) Staff (military) —see Modern United States military usage for organization of Joint Staff (J1 through J8) [ Notes ] [ Further reading ] Gillespie, Robert M. The Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Escalation of the Vietnam Conflict, 1964–1965. Masters Thesis, Clemson University, 1994. Joint Chiefs of Staff, Organizational Development of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, 1942–1987. Joint Secretariat, Joint Chiefs of Staff, 1988. McMaster, H.R. Dereliction of Duty: Lyndon Johnson, Robert McNamara, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and the Lies that Led to Vietnam. New York: Harper Collins, 1997. Perry, Mark Four Stars: The Inside Story of the Forty-Year Battle Between the Joint Chiefs of Staff and America&apos;s Civilian Leaders. New York: Houghton Mifflin, 1989, ISBN 0-395-42923-4. Rearden, Steven L. History of the Office of the Secretary of Defense. 2 vols. Washington, D.C.: Historical Office, Office of the Secretary of Defense, 1984. Schnabel, James F. &apos;&apos;History of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The Joint Chiefs of Staff and National Policy 1945–1947. Volume I&apos;&apos;. Washington, D.C.: Joint History Office, The Joint Staff, 1996. Taylor, Maxwell D. The Uncertain Trumpet. New York: Harper &amp; Row, 1959. [ External links ] Official site &apos;&apos;Joint Action of the Army and the Navy&apos;&apos; (1935 Joint Board publication) * Category:Military of the United States da:Joint Chiefs of Staff de:Joint Chiefs of Staff es:Estado Mayor Conjunto de los Estados Unidos eo:Usona Stabestraro fr:Joint Chiefs of Staff ko:미국 합동참모본부 it:Joint Chiefs of Staff he:המטות המשולבים lt:Jungtinių Amerikos Valstijų Generalinis štabas ja:アメリカ統合参謀本部 no:Den militære sjefsnemnd (USA) pl:Kolegium Połączonych Szefów Sztabów ru:Объединённый комитет начальников штабов sl:Združeni štab Oboroženih sil ZDA fi:Yhdysvaltain puolustushaarakomentajien neuvosto sv:Joint Chiefs of Staff th:คณะเสนาธิการทหารร่วมสหรัฐอเมริกา uk:Об&apos;єднаний комітет начальників штабів США vi:Bộ tổng tham mưu Liên quân Hoa Kỳ zh:参谋长联席会议