[ February 2011 ] [ 1798 6 4 1763 10 15 ] { LordEdwardFitzgerald.jpg } { Carton House, } { Co. Kildare, } { Ireland } { Newgate Prison, Dublin } [ United Kingdom ] { British Empire } { 23x23px } { United Irishmen } [ France ] { French First Republic } { 1779-1798 } { Major } { Battle of Eutaw Springs } Lord Edward FitzGerald (15 October 1763 – 4 June 1798) was an Irish aristocrat and revolutionary. He was the fifth son of the 1st Duke of Leinster and the Duchess of Leinster (née Lady Emily Lennox ). He was born at Carton House, near Dublin, and died of wounds received in resisting arrest on charge of treason. [ Early years ] FitzGerald spent most of his childhood in Frescati House at Blackrock in Dublin where he was tutored by William Ogilvie in a manner inspired by Rousseau &apos;s &apos;&apos;Emile&apos;&apos;. Edward was only 11 years of age when his father died. Through his mother, he was a great-great grandson of king Charles II of England. [ American War of Independence ] Fitzgerald joined the British Army in 1779, he served on the staff of Lord Rawdon in the southern theater of the American Revolutionary War. He was seriously wounded at the Battle of Eutaw Springs on 8 September 1781, his life being saved by an escaped slave named Tony Small (nicknamed &apos;Faithful Tony&apos;). Fitzgerald commissioned a portrait of Tony Small by John Roberts in 1786 whom Lord Edward freed [ Tillyard Stella Citizen lord : the life of Edward Fitzgerald, Irish revolutionary 1998 Farrar, Straus, and Giroux New York 978-0-374-12383-3 1st American ed. ] and employed to the end of his life. He was evacuated from Charleston, South Carolina in 1782 when the British forces abandoned the city. [ Post-war military career ] In 1783 FitzGerald returned to Ireland, where his brother, the 2nd Duke of Leinster, had procured his election to the Irish Parliament as a Member for Athy, a seat he held until 1790. He represented then Kildare County from 1790 to 1798. In Parliament he acted with the small Opposition Irish Patriot Party group led by Henry Grattan, but took no prominent part in debate. After spending a short time at Woolwich to complete his military education, he made a tour through Spain in 1787; and then, dejected by unrequited love for his cousin Georgina Lennox (who later married the 3rd Earl Bathurst ), he sailed for New Brunswick to join the 54th Regiment with the rank of Major. [ Explorer in the &lt; link &gt; &lt; wikilink href= &quot; New World &quot; &gt; New World &lt; /wikilink &gt; &lt; /link &gt; ] The romantic temperament of the young Irishman found congenial soil in the wild surroundings of unexplored Canadian forests, and his enthusiasm for a life closer to nature may have been fortified by study of Jean-Jacques Rousseau &apos;s writings, for which at a later period Lord Edward expressed his admiration. In February 1789, guided by compass, he traversed the country, practically unknown to white men, from Fredericton, New Brunswick to Quebec, falling in with Indians by the way, with whom he fraternized; and in a subsequent expedition he was formally adopted at Detroit by the Bear tribe of Hurons as one of their chiefs, and made his way down the Mississippi to New Orleans, whence he returned to England. The Author Patrick O&apos;Brian based one of his main characters Stephen Maturin on one of the cousin&apos;s of Lord Edward FitzGerald in his book The Far Side of the World. [ Enters politics ] Finding that his brother had procured his election for the County of Kildare, and desiring to maintain political independence, Lord Edward refused the command of an expedition against Cadiz offered him by Pitt, and devoted himself for the next few years to the pleasures of society and his parliamentary duties. He was on terms of intimacy with his first cousin C. J. Fox, with R. B. Sheridan and other leading Whigs. According to Thomas Moore, Lord Edward FitzGerald was the only one of the numerous suitors of Sheridan&apos;s first wife, Elizabeth Ann Linley whose attentions were received with favour; and it is certain that, whatever may have been its limits, a warm mutual affection subsisted between the two. [ Marries in France ] His Whig connections, together with his transatlantic experiences, predisposed Fitzgerald to sympathize with the doctrines of the French Revolution, which he embraced enthusiastically when he visited Paris in October 1792. He lodged with Thomas Paine and listened to the debates in the Convention. At a convivial gathering on the 18 November he supported a toast to &quot; the speedy abolition of all hereditary titles and feudal distinctions &quot;, and gave proof of his zeal by expressly repudiating his own title, a performance for which he was dismissed from the army. { The Encyclopædia Britannica, 1911 edition. P. 444. } Pamela&apos;s final resting place, Thames Ditton While in Paris, FitzGerald became enamoured of a young girl whom he chanced to see at the theatre, and who is said to have had a striking likeness to Mrs. Sheridan. Procuring an introduction he discovered her to be a protégé of Madame de Sillery, Comtesse de Genlis. The parentage of the girl, whose name was Pamela (1773–1831), is uncertain; but although there is some evidence to support the story of Madame de Genlis that Pamela was born in Newfoundland of parents called Sims, the common belief that she was the daughter of Madame de Genlis herself by Louis Philippe II, Duke of Orléans (to whose children she was then acting as governess), was probably well founded. On 27 December 1792 FitzGerald and Pamela were married at Tournay, one of the witnesses being Louis Philippe, afterwards King of the French; and in January 1793 the couple reached Dublin. The couple eventually had a son, named Edward Fox FitzGerald (10 October 1794 - 25 January 1863), married on 6 November 1827 to Jane Paul (died 2 November 1891), and two daughters, Pamela FitzGerald (1795/1796 - 25 November 1869), married on 21 November 1820 Sir Guy Campbell, 1st Baronet (died 26 January 1849), and Lucy Louisa FitzGerald (1798 - September 1826), married on 5 September 1825 Capt. George Francis Lyon (died 8 October 1832). { Oxford Journals: Notes and Queries: Sir William Neville Hart and his Descendants; Frederick Copland-Griffiths; 10 S. X. Oct. 3. 1908 p. 264 } After her husband&apos;s death in Newgate Gaol, Dublin, Pamela, Lady Edward FitzGerald, was no longer welcome at Boyle Farm, the house of his brother Lord Henry FitzGerald in Thames Ditton. But her daughters found much happiness in the village, living with an aunt. After she died, her mortal remains were buried at St Nicholas Churchyard, Thames Ditton. Edward Fox and his wife Jane had an only daughter, Pamela Frances Lucy Augusta Charlotte FitzGerald (29 September 1830 -), who married on 7 December 1850 James Turner. [ Return to Ireland ] { Hugh Douglas Hamilton, 1796 } Ireland was by now seething with dissent which was finding a focus in the increasingly popular and revolutionary Society of the United Irishmen who had been forced underground by the outbreak of war between France and Britain in 1793. Lord Edward FitzGerald, fresh from the gallery of the Convention in Paris, returned to his seat in the Irish Parliament and immediately sprang to their defence but within a week of his return he was ordered into custody and required to apologise at the bar of the House of Commons for violently denouncing in the House a Government proclamation, which Grattan had approved. However, it was not until 1796 that he joined the United Irishmen, who by now had given up as hopeless the path of constitutional reform and whose aim after the recall of Lord FitzWilliam in 1795 was nothing less than the establishment of an independent Irish republic. [ Revolutionary activities ] In May 1796 Theobald Wolfe Tone was in Paris endeavoring to obtain French assistance for an insurrection in Ireland. In the same month FitzGerald and his friend Arthur O&apos;Connor proceeded to Hamburg, where they opened negotiations with the Directory through Reinhard, French minister to the Hanseatic towns. The Duke of York, meeting Pamela at Devonshire House on her way through London with her husband, had told her that &quot; all was known &quot; about his plans, and advised her to persuade him not to go abroad. Also, in Hamburg Lord Edward met with Johan Anders Jägerhorn (or baron de Spurila, as he called himself), a Finnish Swede who had advocated Finnish autonomy and now acted as an intermediary between Lord Edward and the French. The proceedings of the conspirators at Hamburg were made known to the government in London by an informer, Samuel Turner. Pamela was entrusted with all her husband&apos;s secrets and took an active part in furthering his designs; and she appears to have fully deserved the confidence placed in her, though there is reason to suppose that at times she counselled prudence. The result of the Hamburg negotiations was Hoche &apos;s abortive expedition to Bantry Bay in December 1796. In September 1797 the Government learnt from the informer MacNally that Lord Edward was among those directing the conspiracy of the United Irishmen, which was now quickly maturing. He was specially concerned with the military organisation, in which he held the post of colonel of the Kildare regiment and head of the military committee. He had papers showing that men were ready to rise. They possessed some arms, but the supply was insufficient, and the leaders were hoping for a French invasion to make good the deficiency and to give support to a popular uprising. But French help proving dilatory and uncertain, the rebel leaders in Ireland were divided in opinion as to the expediency of taking the field without waiting for foreign aid.Lord Edward was among the advocates of the bolder course and there is some evidence that he favoured a project for the massacre of the Irish peers while in procession to the House of Lords for the trial of Lord Kingston in May 1798, despite the fact many were his own relations [ February 2007 ]. [ Net tightens ] It was probably abhorrence of such measures that converted Thomas Reynolds from a conspirator to an informer; at all events, by him and several others the authorities were kept posted in what was going on, though lack of evidence produced in court delayed the arrest of the ringleaders. But on the 12 March 1798 Reynolds&apos;s information led to the seizure of a number of conspirators at the house of Oliver Bond. Lord Edward FitzGerald, warned by Reynolds, was not among them. As a fellow member of the Ascendancy class, the Government were anxious to make an exception for FitzGerald, and also avoid the embarrassing and dangerous consequences of his subversive activities, communicating their willingness to spare him from the normal fate meted out to &quot; traitors &quot;. The Lord Chancellor, Lord Clare, said to a member of his family, &quot; for God&apos;s sake get this young man out of the country; the ports shall be thrown open, and no hindrance whatever offered. &quot; FitzGerald however refused to desert others who could not escape, and whom he had himself led into danger. On 30 March the government proclamation of martial law authorising the military to act as they saw fit to crush the United Irishmen, led to a campaign of vicious brutality in many parts of the country, and forced the United Irish executive to bring forward plans for the rising, with or without French aid. [ Arrest and death ] { George Cruikshank ) } The capture of Lord Edward FitzGerald, the most dangerous United Irish leader still at liberty, was now the top priority of Dublin Castle and on 9 May a reward of £1,000 was offered for his apprehension. Since the arrests at Bond&apos;s, FitzGerald had been in hiding, but had twice visited his wife in disguise and was himself visited by his stepfather. Meanwhile, the date for the rising was finally fixed for 23 May and FitzGerald awaited the day hiding in a house in Thomas Street, Dublin. However, his hiding place was disclosed by a Catholic barrister and informer named Francis Magan and on 18 May Town Major Henry C. Sirr led a military party to the house where Lord Edward was in bed suffering from a fever. Alerted by the commotion, he jumped out of bed and, ignoring the pleas of the arresting officers Captain William Bellingham Swan (later assistant town Major of Dublin) and Captain Daniel Frederick Ryan to surrender peacefully, FitzGerald stabbed Swan and mortally wounded Ryan with a dagger in a desperate attempt to escape. The weapon used by Lord Edward to defend himself was later stolen from Major Swan&apos;s house by Emma Lucretia Dobbin the daughter of Rev William Dobbin and Catherine Coote. { J Royal Soc Antiquaries of Ireland Vol 41 (1911) p376-379. } He was only secured after Sirr shot him in the shoulder { Freeman&apos;s Journal &amp; #150; 22 May 1798 }. He was conveyed to New Prison, Dublin where he was denied proper medical treatment. At the age of 34 he died of his wounds as the rebellion raged outside on the 4 June 1798. He was buried the next day in the cemetery of St Werburgh&apos;s Church, Dublin. An Act of Attainder confiscating his property was passed, but was eventually repealed in 1819. Shortly after his death, Lord Edward’s sister, Lady Lucy FitzGerald, authored the following statement regarding her brother&apos;s fidelity to Ireland: Irishmen, Countrymen, it is Edward FitzGerald&apos;s sister who addresses you: it is a woman but that woman is his sister: she would therefore die for you as he did. I don&apos;t mean to remind you of what he did for you. &apos;Twas no more than his duty. Without ambition he resigned every blessing this world could afford to be of use to you, to his Countrymen whom he loved better than himself, but in this he did no more than his duty; he was a Paddy and no more; he desired no other title than this. { Bourke, Angela. &quot; The Field Day Anthology of Irish Writing, &quot; p. 59. NYU Press, 2002. } [ Sources ] Thomas Moore, Life and Death of Lord Edward Fitzgerald (2 vols., London, 1832), also a revised edition entitled The Memoirs of Lord Edward Fitzgerald, edited with supplementary particulars by Martin MacDermott (London, 1897) R. R. Madden, The United Irishmen (7 vols., Dublin, 1842–46) C. H. Teelin Personal Narrative of the Irish Rebellion of 1798 (Belfast, 1832) W. J. Fitzpatrick, The Sham Squire, The Rebellion of Ireland and the Informers of 1798 (Dublin, 1866) and Secret Service under Pitt (London, 1892) J. A. Froude, The English in Ireland in the Eighteenth Century (3 vols., London, 1872–74) W. E. H. Lecky, History of England in the Eighteenth Century, vols. vii. and viii. (London, 1896) Thomas Reynolds the younger, The Life of Thomas Reynolds (London, 1839) The Life and Letters of Lady Sarah Lennox, edited by the countess of llchester and Lord Stavordale (London, 1901) Ida A. Taylor, The Life of Lord Edward Fitzgerald (London, 1903), which gives a prejudiced and distorted picture of Pamela. Tilyard, Stella, Citizen Lord: Edward Fitzgerald. 1763–1798 (1998) For particulars of Pamela, and especially as to the question of her parentage, see Gerald Campbell, Edward and Pamela Fitzgerald (London, 1904) Memoirs of Madame de Genlis (London, 1825) Georgette Ducrest, Chroniques populaires (Paris, 1855) Thomas Moore, Memoirs of the Life of R. B. Sheridan (London, 1825. R. J. M.) [ Notes and references ] [ External links ] [ Fitzgerald, Edward (patriot) Fitzgerald, Lord Edward, Irish patriot 1900 x ] Ducal House of Leinster [ ie ] [ Member of Parliament for Athy with Thomas Burgh Thomas Burgh Thomas Burgh Lord Henry FitzGerald Arthur Ormsby 1783–1790 ] [ Lord Charles FitzGerald John Wolfe ] [ Member of Parliament for Kildare County with Maurice Bagenal St Leger Keating 1790–1798 ] [ John La Touche Maurice Bagenal St Leger Keating ] [ FitzGerald, Lord Edward Irish nationalist 15 October 1763 Carton House, Co. Kildare, Ireland 4 June 1798 Newgate Prison, Dublin ] [ December 2011 ] Category:1763 births Category:1798 deaths Category:Irish Anglicans Category:Irish MPs 1783–1790 Category:Irish MPs 1790–1797 Category:Irish MPs 1798–1800 Category:Members of the Parliament of Ireland (pre-1801) Category:People from County Kildare Category:People from Thames Ditton Category:United Irishmen Category:Younger sons of dukes Category:18th-century Irish people Edward ca:Lord Edward FitzGerald cy:Arglwydd Edward FitzGerald fr:Edward FitzGerald (député) ga:An Tiarna Éadbhard Mac Gearailt pl:Lord Edward FitzGerald ru:Фицджеральд, Эдвард sv:Edward Fitzgerald (revolutionär)