{ Sisana Sisane } { 1975 } { Thongdy Sounthonevichit } { 1941 } { 1947 } { National Anthem of Laos.ogg } { National Anthem of Laos(Instrument) } &quot; Pheng Xat Lao &quot; ( Lao : ເພງຊາດລາວ) is the national anthem of the Lao People&apos;s Democratic Republic. It was composed by Dr. Tongdee Soontornwijit (1905-1968) in 1941 and adopted as the national anthem of the Kingdom of Laos in 1947. The original lyrics were replaced when the Lao People&apos;s Democratic Republic was established in 1975 by new lyrics written by Sisana Sisane. [ Lao lyrics ] Laotian Language Latin transcription English translation ຊາດລາວຕັ້ງແຕ່ໃດມາ ລາວທຸກຖ້ວນຫນ້າເຊີດຊູສຸດໃຈ ຮ່ວມແຮງຮ່ວມຈິດຮ່ວມໃຈ ສາມັກຄີກັນເປັນກຳລັງດຽວ ເດັດດ່ຽວພ້ອມກັນກ້າວຫນ້າ ບູຊາຊູກຽດຂອງລາວ ສົ່ງເສີມໃຊ້ສິດເປັນເຈົ້າ ລາວທຸກຊົນເຜົ່າສະເໝີພາບກັນ ບໍ່ໃຫ້ຝູງຈັກກະພັດ ແລະພວກຂາຍຊາດເຂົ້າມາລົບກວນ ລາວທັງມວນຊູເອກະລາດ ອິດສະລະພາບຂອງຊາດລາວໄວ້ ຕັດສິນໃຈສູ້ຊິງເອົາໄຊ ພາຊາດກ້າວໄປສູ່ຄວາມວັດທະນາ Sad lao tung tae dai ma Lao tooktuan na sertsoo soodjai, Huamhang huamjid huamjai Samagki gan pen gamlang diao. Detdiao pom gan gaona Boosa soo giat kong lao, Songserm sai sit pen jao Lao toog sonpao samer pab gun. Baw hai puak juggapud Le puag kaisad kaoma lob Guan, Lao tung muan soo egalard Idsalapab kong sard lao wai, Tudsinjai soo sing ao say Pa Sad lao pai soo kwam watthana. For all time the Lao people Have glorified their Fatherland, United in heart, Spirit and vigour as one. Resolutely moving forwards, Respecting and increasing the dignity of the Lao people And proclaiming the right to be their own masters. The Lao people of all origins are equal And will no longer allow imperialists And traitors to harm them. The entire people will safeguard the independence And the freedom of the Lao nation. They are resolved to struggle for victory In order to lead the nation to prosperity. [ Original lyrics used in 1947 ] Laotian Language Latin transcription English translation ຊາດລາວຕັ້ງແຕ່ເດີມມາ ຂື້ນຊື່ລືຊາຢູ່ໃນອາຊີ ຊາວລາວຜູກພັນໄມຕຼີ ຮ່ວມສາມັກຄີຮັກຫໍ່ໂຮມກັນ ຮັກຊາດຮັກປະເທດເຮົາ ຮັກເຈົ້າປົກເກດເກສາ ໂຮມຮັກຮ່ວມສາສນາ ແຕ່ບູຮານມາຮັກສາດິນແດນ ບໍ່ໃຫ້ຊາດໃດມາລວນ ຮາວີຮົບກວນຍາດແຍ່ງຊີງເອົາ ໃຜຂືນເຂົ້າມາລູ່ວຸ່ນວາຍ ສູ້ຈົນຕົວຕາຍຕ້ານທານສັດຕຼູ ຊ່ວຍເຊີດຊູເລືອດເນື້ອເຊື້ອເຜົ່າ ຟື້ນຟູກູ້ເອົາບັນເທົາທຸກກັນ Xat Lao Tang Tae Deum Ma, Keun Seu Leu Xa Yu Nay Asie, Xao Lao Pouk Pan Maitri, Huam Samakkhi Hak Hoh Hoam Khen. Hak Xat Hak Pathet Hao, Hak Jao Pok Ket Kesa, Hoam Hak Huam Sasna, Tae Buhan Ma Haksa Din Dan. Bo Hay Xat Day Ma Luan, Lavi Louk Kuan Gnat Gneng Xing Ao, Pai Keun Khao Ma choun Vounvay, Sou Jon Tua Thay Than Tan Sattou, Xuay Xeut Xou Luad Neua Xeua Pao, Fuen Fu Kou Ao Bantao Tuk Ken. In the old days, our Lao people Were famous all over Asia. Because the Lao Were united in love. Still today, they love their people and country And rally around their leaders. They preserve the religion of their fathers, And protect the soil of their ancestors. They will never allow another nation to threaten them Or to occupy their territory. Every enemy who enters their country Will find them ready to fight until death. All together, they can restore the ancient glory of their blood, and they will stand together in the days of danger. [ External links ] A video of &quot; Pheng Xat Lao &quot;, broadcast on Lao National Television (LNTV), hosted on Youtube Michael Sauser and Gilbert Greeve - Sauser and Greeve sing the anthem on their CD &quot; Hymnen der Welt: Asien &quot; &quot; Pheng Xat Lao &quot; at empas.com Dookola Swiata - This travel website has an instrumental version of the Anthem, as an.asx file. Category:Laotian music Category:National anthems Category:National symbols of Laos ar:نشيد لاوس الوطني de:Pheng Xat Lao el:Pheng Xat Lao es:Pheng Xat Lao fa:سرود ملی لائوس fr:Pheng Xat Lao ko:라오스의 국가 it:Pheng Xat Lao jv:Pheng Xat Lao lo:ເພງຊາດລາວ lt:Laoso himnas hu:Laosz himnusza nl:Pheng Xat Lao ja:ラオスの国歌 no:Pheng Xat Lao pl:Hymn Laosu pt:Pheng Xat Lao ro:Pheng Xat Lao ru:Гимн Лаоса fi:Pheng Xat Lao sv:Pheng Xat Lao th:เพลงชาติลาว vi:Pheng Xat Lao zh-classical:老撾之歌 zh:老挝人民歌