[ September 2011 ] [ September 2011 ] [ blue ] [ white ] { http://www.aueb.gr/ } { Athens University of Economics and Business } Athens University of Economics and Business (AUEB, ASOEE, or OPA) ( [ Οικονομικό Πανεπιστήμιο Αθηνών (Ο.Π.Α.), Oikonomiko Panepistimio Athinon(OPA) ] ) was founded in 1920 in Athens, Greece. Its buildings are housed on Patision Street. Before 1989, the university was known in Greek as Ανωτάτη Σχολή Οικονομικών και Εμπορικών Επιστημών (Α.Σ.Ο.Ε.Ε.), Anotati Sholi Oikonomikon kai Eborikon Epistimon (A.S.O.E.E.), and in English as the Athens School of Economics and Business. Though the university&apos;s official name has changed, it is still known popularly in Greek by this former acronym. AUEB is the leading Economics and Business university in Greece. It is the third oldest higher educational institute and the oldest in the fields of Economics and Business in Greece. [ History ] The mainbuilding after 1956. The mainbuilding of the Economical University of Athens nowadays. The Athens University of Economics and Business (AUEB) was originally founded in 1920 under the name of Athens School of Commercial Studies. It was renamed in 1926 as the Athens School of Economics and Business, a name that was retained until 1989 when it assumed its present name, the Athens University of Economics and Business. It is the third oldest University in Greece and the oldest one in the general fields of Economics and Business. Up to 1955 the School offered only one degree in the general area of Economics and Commerce. In 1955 it started two separate programs leading to two separate degrees: one in Economics and the other in Business Administration. In 1984 the School was divided into three Departments, namely the Department of Economics, the Department of Business Administration and the Department of Statistics and Informatics. In 1989, the University expanded in six Departments. From 1999 onwards, the University developed even further and nowadays it includes eight academic departments, offering 8 undergraduate degrees, 28 Master degrees and an equivalent number of Doctoral Programs. [ Location ] The Athens University of Economics and Business is centrally located in downtown Athens. The main building of the University is located at 76, Patision Street Street in Athens, two blocks away from the Archaeological Museum. The rear of the building faces the Pedion Areos Park and the Panellinios Sports Club. Four more buildings in the area cover the University&apos;s needs in offices and teaching rooms. One of them is located at 12, Kodrigtonos Street and the other at 12, Derigny Street. The Research Center is located a few blocks away, at 46, Kefallinias Street and the Graduate School building is located at Louzitania building at the corner of Evelpidon and Lefkados Street. [ Faculty ] The academic staff of the University consists of resident faculty, adjunct faculty, and visiting faculty. In addition, teaching and research assistants, foreign language and athletics instructors, and teachers of cultural activities are members of the academic staff. There are 4 levels (ranks) among resident faculty: Professor, Associate Professor, Assistant Professor, and Lecturer. Faculty members are assisted by teaching and research assistants, many of whom hold a Master&apos;s Degree and continue their doctoral studies. The resident academic staff of the University is currently composed of 37% Professors, 18% Associate Professors, 23% Assistant Professors, and 22% Lecturers. Resident faculty has to have a Doctorate in order to assume any level. A vast majority (76%) of the current faculty of AUEB have obtained their PhD degrees from the USA or the UK, in Universities such as Harvard, Columbia, MIT, Cambridge, Northwestern University, Berkeley University, NYU, Pennsylvania, LSE, LBS, Warwick, Manchester, Strathclyde, Essex, Maryland, City, Bath, Reading, etc. An additional 9% of the resident faculty holds a Doctorate from other European countries (Aix-en-Provence, Paris), and finally the remaining 15% holds a Doctorate from a Greek University. AUEB faculty has previously served on the faculties of leading international Universities before getting a position at AUEB. Examples of such Universities include Columbia, Pennsylvania (Wharton), Northwestern, Cambridge, Dartmouth, U of Rochester, Imperial, Erasmus, Manchester, City, ETH Zurich, Paris-Dauphine, etc. [ International recognition and rankings ] The Aueb&apos;s celebration hall main entrance. In a research carried out by Der Spiegel magazine among 500 European Universities, AUEB ranked in the 15th place.In the field of Econometrics, AUEB comes internationally in the 48th place according to the Journal of Econometric Theory.The economics department ranks in the 181st place worldwide, according to its research (source: http://www.econphd.net/rank/). The European Documentation Center of the AUEB is the coordinator of all the European Documentation Centers of Greek Universities. The MBA International Program, has 9 specializations / majors and is offered in English. The Program is accredited by the Association of MBA s (AMBA), and ranked among the top 10 MBA prograin Europe and the top 30 in the world. In the 2009 QS Global 200 Business Schools Report [ http://www.topmba.com/mba-rankings/global-200-business-schools-report/top-business-schools-2009/north-america QS Global 200 Business Schools Report 2009 North America ] the school was ranked 17th in Europe. The Department of Informatics gets 8,000 citations per year and has 5 professors in the top 10,000 researchers by citations according to ACM. [ Library ] The AUEB library in the main building. The AUEB library was founded in 1928 and in 1990 it experienced a massive modernization and IT automation, partly financed by the European Community. Today it covers all aspects of automation, including OPAC, SDI, acquisitions, bar-code-based lending, etc., and uses the integrated library automation system Equilibrium-Libreto. It is one of the largest libraries in Economics and Business Administration in the Balkans. The library comprises more than 100,000 book titles, and more than 1,000 printed academic journal titles covering areas of Economics, International and European Economic Studies, Business Administration, Management Science and Marketing, Informatics, Statistics, Accounting and Finance, and Management and Technology. The library also offers 150 CD-ROMs (the Official Journal of the EC in full text, bibliographical database of the Official Publications of the EU, statistical data on the imports and exports of the member-states of the EU etc.) Access to the above mentioned CD-ROMs is available from all library departments via the CD-RΟΜ network. Finally, the library offers daily business magazines and journals in the areas of economics and business. In addition, the Library participates in a consortium for national and international inter-library loans. Thus, the library users have access to the libraries of the Centre of Planning and Economic Research, the Bank of Greece, the National Documentation Centre, as well as to several libraries in Europe. The library employs 26 people and is open, for all students, from 08:30 to 18:00 on working-days and on Saturday from 10:00-14:00. There are also reading facilities which are available daily until 20:00. Business databases and literature search facilities The AUEB library subscribes over 1,000 electronic journals through all the major electronic search engines (EBSCO, Elsevier&apos;s Sciencedirect, Springer&apos;s Link, JSTOR, MCB, WilsonWeb, Blackwell publishing, Oxford University Press, Wiley InterScience, CambridgeJournalsOnline etc.). Electronic access to the subscribed journals can be performed from any computer connected to the University intranet or irrespective of location, through dial-up, which is available 24 hours a day 7 days a week. Also the library offers access to the OECD (Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development) database including data, analyses and forecasts. The library also encompasses the European Documentation Centre which was established by the European Commission in partnership with the University in June 1992 in order to support teaching and research on EU matters. It is part of the University&apos;s library and is open to all members of the University, to the wider academic community as well as to everyone interested in EU policies and affairs. [ Computer center ] CS lab in AUEB. AUEB has one of the largest and most up-to-date computer center facilities in the country. It occupies an area of approximately 700 m2 and holds an extensive library of educational, scientific and business software. The Computer Center tailored for the research and teaching needs of the University comprises to the following hardware and software facilities: One DEC Alpha Server 1000A 5/400 (450 MHz.) mainframe, running Open/VMS, and configured with 640MB RAM, 5 hard disk units with 26GΒ total capacity. The software includes TCP/IP, Fortran, Pascal, C, SAS, SPSS, TSP, NAG, MIS and ORACLE 7 server (full development system). Two Silicon Graphics Origin 200 mainframe systems, with (4) processors (R10000, 180 MHz, RISC 64 bit) each, running IRIX 6.4 (64 bit UNIX). The software includes Email-server, FORTRAN 90 and 77, C++, Pascal, Mathematica, Informix and ORACLE 7. One Compaq ProLiant 1600 system with (2) Pentium II 450 MHz. processors, 512 MB SDRAM, 3 hard disk units with 27 GB total capacity, a DAT tape drive 12/24 GB and four Fast Ethernet 100 Mbit/s adapters. This system is the primary Windows 2000 Server having the task to control and administer the usage of (240) Windows NT Workstations (Pentium MMX) located in five computer labs at the Computer Center. In addition there are two Pentium Pro systems used as secondary Windows NT Server and Network Router respectively. Serving more than 7,000 users, the Computer Centre research and teaching facilities include five computer labs (classrooms) with a total of 236 Pentium MMX systems, used either as terminals to the Mainframes (IRIX and VMS) or as Windows NT workstations. The workstation software includes the MS Office, SPSS, Internet Explorer etc. [ Academic departments ] The Athens University of Economics and Business is composed of 8 academic Departments in the areas of Economics, International and European Economics, Business Administration, Marketing and Communication, Accounting and Finance, Management Science and Technology, Informatics, and Statistics. Each Department is run by the Chairman of the Department, the Vice-Chairman, and the General Assembly of the Department. Each Department accepts students at the undergraduate level, after successfully passing the pan-Hellenic exams, and offers a 4-year undergraduate program of studies, leading a Degree (Ptychion). Each academic department also offers one or more graduate programs of studies, leading to a Master&apos;s Degree, as well as a Doctoral Program, leading to a PhD Degree. Department Founded Department Web Site Economics 1955 www.econ.aueb.gr Business Administration 1955 www.ode.aueb.gr Informatics 1984 www.cs.aueb.gr International and European Economic Studies 1991 www.aueb.gr/deos Marketing and Communication 1989 www.mbc.aueb.gr Statistics 1989 www.stat-athens.aueb.gr Accounting and Finance 1999 www.loxri.aueb.gr Management Science and Technology 1999 dmst.aueb.gr [ Undergraduate studies ] Each department of the Athens University of Economics and Business awards an undergraduate degree (Ptychion) equivalent to a four-year B.A. or B.Sc. in their respective fields. Students are accepted after a successful nation-wide entrance examination. On the average, only one out of seven candidates is admitted. In some departments the competition is even higher. AUEB departments traditionally accept the candidates with the highest scores in the entrance exams. To be able to graduate and get his/her degree, a student has to attend and successfully complete eight semesters of study (four years), corresponding to a total of approximately 240 ECTS credit hours. These hours correspond to core as well as to elective courses. Students in one department are allowed to take courses offered by other departments. Foreign language courses in English, French or German are offered in all semesters and count towards degree requirements. Depending on their choice of electives, students acquire a major concentration on particular subjects. According to the University&apos;s grading system the grades range from zero (0) to ten (10). The passing grades are from five (5) and above. [ Undergraduate courses in English ] In addition to the above, there are many courses offered in English, mainly (but not only) for international students who come to AUEB under the Erasmus program. A total of approximately 60 courses are offered in English, each one counting towards 6 ECTS credits. [ Postgraduate studies ] [ Masters programs ] There are 28 different Masters Programs that are currently offered at AUEB. They include full-time programs, part-time programs, and joint programs (with other Universities). The duration of graduate studies at the Master&apos;s level is between 15-27 months. Students are admitted to these programs after satisfying certain admission criteria such as results at the GMAT or GRE tests, proficiency of English (and maybe another language), academic performance at the undergraduate level, work experience (mainly for the MBA as well as the part time programs), etc. Mastery of English is a prerequisite as courses include extensive seminars and lectures in English. Graduate students may receive scholarships or assistantships. All programs offer different specializations, allowing students to put together a customized program that fulfills their professional objectives and interests. [ Classical programmes (full-time) ] The postgraduate building of the Economical University of Athens, Evelpidon street. M.Sc. in Economics (Economic Theory or Applied Economics &amp; Finance) M.Sc. in International and European Economics (International Economics &amp; Finance or European Economic Policy) M.B.A. M.Sc. in Management of Services M.Sc. in Marketing and Communication with New Technologies M.Sc. in Human Resources Management M.Sc. in Accounting and Finance M.B.A. International M.Sc. in Information Systems M.Sc. in Computer Science M.Sc. in Statistics [ Executive programmes (part-time) ] M.Sc. in Applied Economics and Strategy M.Sc. in Finance and Banking M.Sc. in European Studies webserver M.Scin Management of Services M.Sc. in Marketing &amp; Communication with New Technologies M.Sc. in Human Resources Management M.Sc. in Accounting and Finance M.B.A. International (part time) M.B.A. Executive M.B.A. in Telecoms M.Sc. in Statistics [ Programmes in collaboration with other universities ] Athens Ph.D. (with the University of Athens ) Athens M.B.A. (with the National Technical University of Athens ) M.Sc. in Business Mathematics (with the University of Athens ) M.A. in Heritage Management (with the University of Kent ) [ Doctoral programs ] AUEB also offers two Doctoral Programs. Students who get admitted to the Doctoral program have to follow one or two years of courses, pass the qualifying exams, and then undertake a Doctoral research, submit a Doctoral Thesis and defend it successfully in front of an academic jury.The PhD&apos;s Programs are offered from two Departments. The Department of Economics offers a PhD in Economics which is very strong. The other PhD Program is offered by the Department of International &amp; European Economic Studies and it has two specializations. The first one provides a PhD in Economics (Theory and Policy, Econometrics, International Economics etc.) The other provides a PhD in Economics with emphasis in European Economic Policy plus elements from other social sciences like Law and Politics [ Non-degree programs ] The University offers additional training to the students of the University, as well as executive training programs. A number of non-degree courses are offered to the students who are interested to expand their knowledge and skills. These include foreign language courses and courses on computer skills. Examples of these courses are: Foreign Language Courses: English, French, German, Italian, Spanish, Chinese ECDL certificate courses, and Microsoft developer certificate courses. In addition, a large number of executive seminars are offered, either in-house to companies, or open. Examples of these programs include: Introduction to Entrepreneurship Developing and Managing the Family Business Doing Business in the Balkans and Black Sea Region Managing Change Developing Leadership Financial Engineering Seminars Mergers &amp; Acquisitions Managing Risk E-Business, E-Procurement [ Research laboratories ] The laboratories mission is:To conduct forefront research in all aspects of scientific knowledge studied within the University,To develop educational, research-based and other similar activities in accordance with the general principles and Research Code of the University,To cooperate with other Research Centres and Academic Institutions in Greece or abroad, yet within a frame of solidarity and mutual trust, provided that similar or complementary scientific objectives are being sought,To organise and host conferences, seminars, talks etc., and publicise their proceedings as well as other scientific material,To work together with various public or private organisations, to address existence or potential problems. The research laboratories currently operating at AUEB are the following: [ Department of Accounting and Finance ] Accounting Laboratory Laboratory for Applied Finance [ Department of Business Administration ] Business Informatics Laboratory Industrial Relations and Negotiations Laboratory Business Strategy Laboratory Analysis of Markets and Consumer Behaviour Laboratory Development and Promotion of Financial Products and Services Laboratory [ Department of Economics ] Econometrics Laboratory Athens Laboratory of Economic Policy Studies (IMOP) [ Department of Informatics ] Computer and Communication Systems Laboratory Information Systems and Databases Laboratory Network Economics and Services Laboratory Artificial Intelligence and Decision Support Systems Laboratory Wireless Networks and Multimedia Telecommunications Laboratory [ Department of International &amp; amp; European Economic Studies ] Laboratory for the Documentation and Analysis of European and International Economic/Financial/Econometric Issues (ΕUROLAB) [ Department of Management Science &amp; amp; Technology ] Electronic Commerce and e-Business Laboratory - ELTRUN Management Science Laboratory Transportation Systems and Supply Chain Management Laboratory Information Systems Technology Laboratory - ISTLab Strategy and Enterpreneurship Laboratory [ Department of Marketing &amp; amp; Communication ] Multimedia Laboratory for Communication and Marketing Marketing Laboratory (ALARM) Human Resource Management Laboratory Sectoral Research and Studies Laboratory Business Applications and Evaluation Laboratory Digital Business and Strategy Laboratory [ Department of Statistics ] Laboratory of Propability and Statistics Applications in Complex Economy, Insurance and Technology Systems Statistical Methodology and Data Analysis Laboratory [ Students&apos; Association &quot; Sotiris Petroulas &quot; ] { Demonstration of the students&apos; association &quot; Sotiris Petroulas &quot; in the center of Athens. } &quot; Sotiris Petroulas &quot; Students&apos; Association is managed by 11 members elected during the students&apos; elections each spring. The Association has played a key role in the solution of problems of student life and contributes to the enhancement of the quality of studies at the University. [ See also ] Education in Greece List of universities in Greece [ References ] [ External links ] [ http://www.aueb.gr/ ] [ 37 59 38 N 23 43 56 E region:GR title ] Category:Universities in Greece Category:Business schools in Greece Category:Education in Athens Category:Educational institutions established in 1920 University of Economics and Business de:Wirtschaftsuniversität Athen el:Οικονομικό Πανεπιστήμιο Αθηνών es:Universidad de Economía y Negocio de Atenas fr:Université d’économie d’Athènes ru:Афинский университет экономики и бизнеса sh:Atinski ekonomski univerzitet uk:Афінський університет економіки та бізнесу