[ the period of time. For the book by Elie Wiesel, see Night (book) other uses Night (disambiguation) ] { Rainbow Bridge in } { Tokyo at night } Night or nighttime is the period of time between the sunset and the sunrise when the Sun is below the horizon. This occurs after dusk. The opposite of night is day (or &quot; daytime &quot; to distinguish it from &quot; day &quot; as used for a 24-hour period). The start and end points of time of a night vary based on factors such as season, latitude, longitude and timezone. At any given time, one side of the planet Earth is bathed in light from the Sun (the daytime) and the other side of the Earth is in the shadow caused by the Earth blocking the light of the sun. This shadow is what we call the darkness of night. Natural illumination is still provided by a combination of moonlight, planet ary light, starlight, diffuse zodiacal light, gegenschein, and airglow. In some circumstances, bioluminescence, aurorae and lightning can provide some illumination. The glow provided by artificial illumination is sometimes referred to as light pollution because it can interfere with observational astronomy and ecosystem s. [ Duration and geography ] { Nile River Delta at night } Nights are shorter than days on average due to two factors. Firstly, the sun is not a point, but has an apparent size of about 32 arc minute s. Secondly, the atmosphere refracts sunlight so that some of it reaches the ground when the sun is below the horizon by about 34 arc minutes. The combination of these two factors means that light reaches the ground when the center of the sun is below the horizon by about 50 arc minutes. Without these effects, day and night would be the same length at the autumnal (autumn/fall) and vernal (spring) equinox es, the moments when the sun passes over the equator. In reality, around the equinoxes the day is almost 14 minutes longer than the night at the equator, and even more towards the pole s. The summer and winter solstice s mark the shortest and the longest night, respectively. The closer a location is to either the North Pole or the South Pole, the larger the range of variation in the night&apos;s length. Although equinoxes occur with a day and night close to equal length, before and after an equinox the ratio of night to day changes more rapidly in high latitude locations than in low latitude locations. In the Northern Hemisphere, Denmark has shorter nights in June than India has. In the Southern Hemisphere, Antarctica has longer nights in June than Chile has. The Northern and Southern Hemispheres of the world experience the same patterns of night length at the same latitudes, but the cycles are 6 months apart so that one hemisphere experiences long nights (winter) while the other is experiencing short nights (summer). Between the pole and the polar circle, the variation in daylight hours is so extreme that for a portion of the summer, there is no longer an intervening night between consecutive days and in the winter there is a period that there is no intervening day between consecutive nights. [ On other celestial bodies ] { Waning moon } { Nótt, the personification of night in } { Norse mythology, rides her horse in this 19th-century painting by } { Peter Nicolai Arbo. } The phenomenon of day and night is due to the rotation of a celestial body about its axis, creating the illusion of the sun rising and setting. Different bodies spin at very different rates, however. Some may spin much faster than Earth, while others spin extremely slowly, leading to very long days and nights. The planet Venus rotates once every 224.7 days  – by far the slowest rotation period of any of the major planets. In contrast, the gas giant Jupiter &apos;s sidereal day is only 9 hours and 56 minutes. [ Seidelmann, P. K.; Abalakin, V. K.; Bursa, M.; Davies, M. E.; de Burgh, C.; Lieske, J. H.; Oberst, J.; Simon, J. L.; Standish, E. M.; P. C. 2001 http://www.hnsky.org/iau-iag.htm Report of the IAU/IAG Working Group on Cartographic Coordinates and Rotational Elements of the Planets and Satellites: 2000 HNSKY Planetarium Program 2007-02-02 ] A planet may experience large temperature variations between day and night, such as Mercury, the planet closest to the sun. This is one consideration in terms of planetary habitability or the possibility of extraterrestrial life. [ Impact on life ] The disappearance of sunlight, the primary energy source for life on Earth, has dramatic impacts on the morphology, physiology and behavior of almost every organism. Some animals sleep during the night, while other nocturnal animal s including moth s and cricket s are active during this time. The effects of day and night are not seen in the animal kingdom alone; plant s have also evolved adaptations to cope best with the lack of sunlight during this time. For example, crassulacean acid metabolism is a unique type of carbon fixation which allows photosynthetic plants to store carbon dioxide in their tissues as organic acid s during the night, which can then be used during the day to synthesize carbohydrate s. This allows them to keep their stomata closed during the daytime, preventing transpiration of precious water. As artificial lighting has improved, especially after the Industrial Revolution, night time activity has increased and become a significant part of the economy in most places. Many establishments, such as nightclub s, bar s, convenience store s, fast-food restaurants, gas stations, distribution facilities, and police stations now operate 24 hours a day or stay open as late as 1 or 2 a.m. Even without artificial light, moon light sometimes makes it possible to travel or work outdoors at night. [ Cultural aspects ] [ June 2008 ] Night is often associated with danger and evil, because of the psychological connection of night&apos;s all-encompassing darkness to the fear of the unknown and darkness&apos;s obstruction of a major sensory system (the sense of sight ). Humans are and have been daylight creatures for at least several million of years, and nighttime is naturally associated with the vulnerability and danger for human physical survival. Criminals, animals, and other potential dangers can be concealed by darkness. Midnight has a particular importance in human imagination and culture. The belief in magic often includes the idea that magic and magicians are more powerful at night. Seances of spiritualism are usually conducted closer to midnight. Similarly, mythical and folkloric creatures as vampire s and werewolves are described as being more active at night. Ghost s are believed to wander around almost exclusively during night-time. In almost all cultures, there exist stories and legends warning of the dangers of night-time. In fact, the Saxons called the darkness of night the &apos;death mist&apos;. [ July 2007 ] In literature, night and the lack of light are often color-associated with blackness which is historically symbolic in many cultures for villainy, non-existence, or a lack of knowledge (with the knowledge usually symbolized by light or illumination). [ See also ] [ night ] [ En-Night-article.ogg 2006-12-10 ] { * } { Black Sun (mythology) } Earth clock Earth&apos;s shadow Light pollution Midnight Night Aviation Regulations Night sky Nightlife Nocturne Olbers&apos; paradox [ Night ] [ References ] Category:Time in astronomy Category:Parts of a day Category:Article Feedback 5 af:Nag ang:Niht ar:ليل arc:ܠܠܝܐ ay:Aruma az:Gecə bn:রাত bh:रात bg:Нощ bo:དགོང་མོ། br:Noz ca:Nit cs:Noc ch:Puengi sn:Husiku cy:Nos da:Nat pdc:Nacht de:Nacht et:Öö eml:Nôt (pêrt dal giōren) myv:Ве es:Noche eo:Nokto eu:Gau fa:شب fr:Nuit ga:Oíche gd:Oidhche gl:Noite ko:밤 (시간) hr:Noć io:Nokto id:Malam it:Notte he:לילה kk:Түн sw:Usiku ht:Nwit la:Nox lv:Nakts lt:Naktis hu:Éjszaka mk:Ноќ ml:രാത്രി mn:Шөнө nah:Yohualli nl:Nacht ne:राती new:बहनि ja:夜 no:Natt nn:Natt nrm:Nyit oc:Nuèit or:ରାତି pnb:رات pap:Anochi ps:شپه pl:Noc pt:Noite ro:Noapte qu:Tuta ru:Ночь sco:Nicht scn:Notti simple:Night sk:Noc sl:Noč sr:Ноћ sh:Noć su:Peuting fi:Yö sv:Natt ta:இரவு tt:Төн te:రాత్రి th:กลางคืน chr:ᏒᏃᏱ uk:Ніч vec:Note vi:Đêm wa:Nute war:Gab-í wo:Guddi yi:נאכט zh-yue:夜晚 bat-smg:Naktės zh:晚上