[ the Software Company Memex Technology Limited ] The memex (a portmanteau of &quot; memory &quot; and &quot; index &quot; ) is the name given by Vannevar Bush to the hypothetical proto-hypertext system he described in his 1945 The Atlantic Monthly article As We May Think (AWMT). Bush envisioned the memex as a device in which individuals would compress and store all of their books, records, and communications, &quot; mechanized so that it may be consulted with exceeding speed and flexibility &quot;. The memex would provide an &quot; enlarged intimate supplement to one&apos;s memory &quot;. { Manovich, Lev. &quot; As We May Think &quot;. The New Media Reader. The MIT Press. } The concept of the memex influenced the development of early hypertext systems (eventually leading to the creation of the World Wide Web ) and personal knowledge base software. { DAVIES, STEPHEN. &quot; Still Building The Memex. &quot; Communications Of The ACM 54.2 (Feb. 2011): 80-88. Business Source Elite. Web. 12 Dec. 2011. } [ Details ] [ A proto-hypertext system ] In Bush&apos;s 1945 paper, he describes a memex as an electromechanical device that individuals could use to read a large self-contained research library, and add or follow associative trails of links and notes created by that individual, or recorded by other researchers. The technology used would have been a combination of electromechanical controls, microfilm cameras and readers, all integrated into a large desk. Most of the microfilm library would have been contained within the desk, but the user could add or remove microfilm reels at will. The top of the desk would have slanting translucent screens on which material could be projected for convenient reading. The top of the memex would have a transparent platen. When a longhand note, photograph, memoranda, or other things were placed on the platen, the depression of a lever would cause the item to be photographed onto the next blank space in a section of the memex film. The memex would become &quot; &apos;a sort of mechanized private file and library&apos;.-Bush. It would use microfilm storage, dry photography, and analog computing to give postwar scholars access to a huge, indexed repository of knowledge-any section of which could be called up with a few keystrokes. &quot; { Wardrip-Fruin, Noah and Nick Montfort, ed (2003). The New Media Reader. p. 35. The MIT Press. ISBN 0-262-23227-8. } The vision of the memex predates, and is credited as the inspiration for, the first practical hypertext systems of the 1960s. Bush describes the memex and other visions of As We May Think as projections of technology known in the 1930s and 1940s - in the spirit of Jules Verne or Arthur C. Clarke &apos;s 1945 proposal to orbit geosynchronous satellite s for global telecommunication. The memex proposed by Bush would create trails of links connecting sequences of microfilm frames, rather than links in the modern sense where a hyperlink connects a single word, phrase or picture within a document and a local or remote destination. [ Associative trails ] An associative trail as conceived by Bush would be a way to create a new linear sequence of microfilm frames across any arbitrary sequence of microfilm frames by creating a chained sequence of links in the way just described, along with personal comments and side trails. At the time Bush saw the current ways of indexing information as limiting and instead proposed a way to store information that was analogous to the mental association of the human brain: storing information with the capability of easy access at a later time using certain cues (in this case, a series of numbers as a code to retrieve data) {. The World Wide Web: the Beginning and Now: Vannevar Bush and Memex } The closest analogy with the modern Web browser would be to create a list of bookmarks to articles relevant to a topic, and then to have some mechanism for automatically scrolling through the articles (for example, use Google to search for a keyword, obtain a list of matches, repeatedly use the &quot; open in new tab &quot; feature of the Web browser, and then visit each tab sequentially). Modern hypertext systems with word and phrase-level linking offer more sophistication in connecting relevant information, but until the rise of wiki and other social software models, modern hypertext systems have rarely imitated Bush in providing individuals with the ability to create personal trails and share them with colleagues - or publish them widely. [ Other features ] The memex would have features other than linking. The user could record new information on microfilm, by taking photos from paper or from a touch-sensitive translucent screen. A user could &quot;... insert a comment of his own, either linking it into the main trail or joining it by a side trail to a particular item.... Thus he builds a trail of his interest through the maze of materials available to him. &quot; { &quot; As We May Think &quot; - The original article from the } { Atlantic Monthly archives } A user could also create a copy of an interesting trail (containing references and personal annotations) and &quot;... pass it to his friend for insertion in his own memex, there to be linked into the more general trail. &quot; As observers like Tim Oren have pointed out, the memex could be considered to be a microfilm-based precursor to the personal computer. The September 10, 1945, Life magazine article showed the first illustrations of what the memex desk could look like, as well as illustrations of a head-mounted camera, which a scientist could wear while doing experiments, and a typewriter capable of voice recognition and of reading text by speech synthesis. Considered together, these memex machines were probably the earliest practical description of what we would call today the Office of the future. &quot; Given a memex, a scholar could create her own knowledge tools as connections within reams of information, share these tools, and use complexes of tools to create yet more sophisticated knowledge that could in turn be deployed toward this work. The memex has been envisioned as a means of turning an information explosion into a knowledge explosion. This remains one of the defining dreams of new media. &quot; [ Extending, storing, and consulting the record of the species ] Bush&apos;s idea for the memex extended far beyond a mechanism which might augment the research of one individual working in isolation. In Bush&apos;s idea, the ability to connect, annotate, and share both published works and personal trails would profoundly change the process by which the &quot; world&apos;s record &quot; is created and used: Wholly new forms of encyclopedias will appear, ready made with a mesh of associative trails running through them, ready to be dropped into the memex and there amplified. The lawyer has at his touch the associated opinions and decisions of his whole experience, and of the experience of friends and authorities. The patent attorney has on call the millions of issued patents, with familiar trails to every point of his client&apos;s interest. The physician, puzzled by a patient&apos;s reactions, strikes the trail established in studying an earlier similar case, and runs rapidly through analogous case histories, with side references to the classics for the pertinent anatomy and histology.... The historian, with a vast chronological account of a people, parallels it with a skip trail which stops only on the salient items, and can follow at any time contemporary trails which lead him all over civilization at a particular epoch. There is a new profession of trail blazers, those who find delight in the task of establishing useful trails through the enormous mass of the common record. The inheritance from the master becomes, not only his additions to the world&apos;s record, but for his disciples the entire scaffolding by which they were erected. -- As We May Think Bush states that &quot; technical difficulties of all sorts have been ignored, &quot; but that, &quot; also ignored are means as yet unknown which may come any day to accelerate technical progress as violently as did the advent of the thermionic tube. &quot; Indeed, anyone who stops to consider the performance consequences of trail following - let alone link-directed pointer-chasing - over a microfilm library of near universal scope should quickly come to the conclusion that microfilm is no more appropriate a technology for implementing AWMT&apos;s vision than Jules Verne &apos;s cannon is an appropriate technology for sending astronauts to the Moon. In both cases the vision may be more significant than the specific technology used to describe it. See Michael Buckland &apos;s conclusion: &quot; Bush&apos;s contributions in this area were twofold: (i) A significant engineering achievement by the team under his leadership in building a truly rapid prototype microfilm selector, and (ii) a speculative article, &apos;As We May Think,&apos; which, through its skillful writing and the social prestige of its author, has had an immediate and lasting effect in stimulating others. &quot; { Buckland, Michael K. &quot; Emanuel Goldberg, Electronic Document Retrieval, And Vannevar Bush&apos;s Memex &quot;. Journal of the American Society for Information Science 43, no. 4 (May 1992): 284–294 } In &quot; Memex: Getting Back on the Trail &quot;, { Nyce, James M.; Kahn, Paul (eds.) &quot; From Memex to Hypertext: Vannevar Bush and the Mind&apos;s Machine &quot;. San Diego, London (...) 1991. [A reprint of all of Bush&apos;s texts regarding Memex accompanied by related Sources and Studies] } Tim Oren argues that Bush&apos;s original vision expressed in AWMT describes a &quot;... private device into which public encyclopedia&apos;s and colleague&apos;s trails might be inserted to be joined with the owner&apos;s own work. &quot; However, in Bush&apos;s manuscript draft of &quot; Memex II &quot; of 1959 (also published in ), Bush says, &quot; Professional societies will no longer print papers... &quot; and states that individuals will either order sets of papers to come on tape - complete with photographs and diagrams - or download &apos;facsimiles&apos; by telephone. Each society would maintain a &apos;master memex&apos; containing all papers, references, tables &quot; intimately interconnected by trails, so that one may follow a detailed matter from paper to paper, going back through the classics, recording criticism in the margins. &quot; [ Missing features: search and metadata ] The AWMT paper did not describe any automatic search, nor any universal metadata scheme such as a standard library classification or a hypertext element set like the Dublin core. Instead, when the user made an entry, such as a new or annotated manuscript, typescript or image, he was expected to index and describe it in his personal code book. By consulting his code book, the user could retrace annotated and generated entries. [ Criticism ] [ November 2010 ] Michael Buckland, in an article published in 1992, suggested that the memex was severely flawed because Bush did not thoroughly understand information science and had a bad opinion of indices and classification scheme s : &quot; Bush thought that the creation of arbitrary associations between individual records was the basis of memory, so he wanted &apos;mem(ory-)ex&apos;, or &apos;Memex instead of index&apos;. The result was a personalized, but superficial and inherently self-defeating design. &quot; Buckland was writing at the very infancy of the World Wide Web (WWW) which was first introduced during 1991 and not widely experienced until 1993. At introduction, the web was predominantly link based (associational). Classification and indexing efforts followed, with automatic indexing in the form of search engine s quickly gaining prominence over classification efforts, while both remained complementary to links. Whether Buckland would not have applied this same denigration of Memex equally to the WWW as it flourished in its early years is unclear. While it has since become clear that an index (search engine) is the most expedient entre into unfamiliar subject matter, associational links have remained an effective navigational method for obtaining intensive coverage of a subject area under study. In the Internet era, links are typically incorporated during authorship, while indices are almost always mechanical. Bush&apos;s unwillingness to place greater prominence on indices might have stemmed from his inability to visualize a near-term mechanical process for their creation, rather than a failure to recognize their utility once obtained. Buckland also states that Bush&apos;s idea should be viewed from the historical perspective of microfilm technology developed prior to 1945 rather than based on the power and versatility of digital computer technology developed after 1945. Buckland summarizes the very advanced pre-World War II development of microfilm-based rapid retrieval devices, specifically the microfilm-based workstation proposed by Leonard Townsend in 1938 and the microfilm and photoelectronic based selector, patented by Emanuel Goldberg during 1931. Buckland states: &quot; The literature on documentation in the 1930s was as preoccupied with microfilm technology as it is now with computer technology and for the same reason, each being the most promising information retrieval technology of the time. &quot; Buckland notes that Bush directed creation of a photoelectronic microfilm &apos;rapid selector&apos; at MIT during 1938-1940 using stroboscope technology pioneered by his colleague Harold Edgerton. Buckland suggests that Bush and his team may not have been aware of Goldberg&apos;s earlier work when they built their 1938-1940 prototype, but that IBM researchers and Bush&apos;s Eastman Kodak Research Laboratory sponsor certainly were. Buckland concludes: &quot; We speculate that Bush did not independently originate the notion of an electronic microfilm selector, although that was possible. It is not surprising that the same invention sometimes occurs independently and more or less simultaneously when a need is present and the technology becomes ripe. &quot; [ Legacy ] This idea directly influenced computer pioneers J.C.R. Licklider (see his 1960 paper Man-Computer Symbiosis ), Douglas Engelbart (see his 1962 report Augmenting Human Intellect ), and also led to Ted Nelson &apos;s groundbreaking work in concepts of hypermedia and hypertext. { Engines of Creation (1986) by } { K. Eric Drexler } [ November 2011 ] [ November 2011 ] {. } [ November 2011 ] [ November 2011 ] As We May Think also predicted many kinds of technology invented after its publication in addition to hypertext such as personal computers, the Internet, the World Wide Web, speech recognition, and online encyclopedia s such as Wikipedia : &quot; Wholly new forms of encyclopedias will appear, ready-made with a mesh of associative trails running through them, ready to be dropped into the memex and there amplified. &quot; Bush&apos;s influence is still evident in research laboratories of today in Gordon Bell &apos;s MyLifeBits (from Microsoft Research ), which implements path -based systems reminiscent of the Memex. A Memex is featured in Charles Stross &apos; cross-genre novel The Atrocity Archives, and its sequels. In The Fuller Memorandum, the publication of As We May Think is described as a &quot; leak &quot; : a number of the things had actually been built, using a slush fund earmarked for the Manhattan Project. The product of electromechanical engineering at its finest, not to mention its most horrendously complex, each Memex cost as much as a B-29 bomber--and contained six times as many moving parts, most of them assembled by watchmakers. { The Fuller Memorandum (2010) by } { Charles Stross. } [ See also ] People Andries van Dam Douglas Engelbart J.C.R. Licklider Paul Otlet, considered one of the fathers of information science Ted Nelson Tim Berners-Lee, creator of the World Wide Web Vannevar Bush Ideas As We May Think Intelligence amplification Mundaneum, the organization created in 1910 that aimed to classify all knowledge Office of the future Victorian Internet, term to describe 19th century telecommunications technologies World Wide Web [ References ] [ 2 ] [ External links ] &quot; As We May Think &quot; - The original article from the Atlantic Monthly archives &quot; As We May Think - A Celebration of Vannevar Bush&apos;s 1945 Vision &quot;, at Brown University Vannevar Bush and Memex – Living Internet Category:Information science Category:Classification systems Category:History of computing Category:History of human–computer interaction Category:Multimodal interaction Category:Human–computer interaction Category:History of the Internet Category:Hypertext Category:Science studies Category:Scientific revolution ca:Memex cs:Memex da:Memex de:Memex es:Memex fr:Memex ko:메멕스 id:Memex it:Memex he:ממקס la:Memex hu:Memex nl:Memex ja:Memex no:Memex pl:Memex pt:Memex fi:Memex