Luís Carlos Prestes. Photo taken between 1930-40. Luís Carlos Prestes (January 3, 1898 – March 7, 1990) was a leader of the 1920s &apos;&apos;tenente&apos;&apos; rebellion and the Communist opposition to the dictatorship of Getúlio Vargas in Brazil. Known as the &quot; Knight of Hope &quot; - title of a biography written by Jorge Amado - Prestes helped organize the failed tenente rebellion of 1922, a revolt by the largely middle class officer corps and poor conscripted servicemen against the agrarian oligarchies that dominated Brazil&apos;s Old Republic (1889–1930). As he was sick with typhoid fever, he was not able to fight on the day of the rebellion. From 1924 Prestes was one of the leaders of the insurrectionary movement, leading the Coluna Prestes Prestes&apos; column on a [ 25000 km 0 on ] march through the rural Brazilian countryside, aiming not to defeat the enemy forces of the Federal government, but keep the column in being and continue to threaten the enemy. The tenente revolt heralded the end of the politics of coffee and milk and coronelism and the beginning of social reforms. Years later, in 1930 the Revolution of 1930 would bring down the Old Republic. Joined by many moderate tenentes, but not Prestes, the Revolution of 1930 installed Getúlio Vargas as provisional president. Although the tenentes sympathized with him, Vargas was a far more conservative figure. As the tenentes wanted Prestes to join Vargas, Prestes decided to meet him in Porto Alegre and explained his idea of socialist revolution for around two hours. Vargas was highly impressed by him, and even donated 800 contos de réis, around 400,000 USD, but Prestes viewed Vargas as the leader of a bourgeois revolution, and decided to donate most of the money to the Latin American branch of the Comintern, which financed the group for a few years. Another part of the money was given to the tenente Siqueira Campos, who died in a plane crash while flying from Argentina to Brazil. His body was discovered three days later, but the money was never found. As Getúlio Vargas was gaining power in Brazil, Prestes turned to Marxism while in exile in Buenos Aires. In the 1930s he went on to lead the Aliança Nacional Libertadora (ANL), a left-wing popular front launched in 1935 of socialists, communists, and other progressives led by the Communist Party in opposition to Vargas&apos; crackdown against organized labor. Getúlio Vargas, then Brazil&apos;s president, would thus look to a form of authoritarianism that could suppress his enemies on the left, led by Prestes, through violence and state terror to survive with his coalition intact during the agitated years after 1934. Thus, Vargas, now allied with all the agrarian oligarchies, with an established network of economic and political power, and the Integralists (a fascist movement with a mass, popular support-base in urban Brazil), forced the Brazilian Congress to respond to the growth of the Communist movement. Congress branded all leftist opposition as &quot; subversive &quot; under a March 1935 National Security Act that allowed the President to ban the ANL, which was forced, reluctantly, to begin an armed insurrection in November. The authoritarian regime, like its fascist counterparts in Europe, responded by imprisoning and torturing Prestes and violently crushing the Communist movement through state terror. By mid-1935 Brazilian politics were drastically destabilized. In July 1935 the government moved against the ANL, with troops raiding offices, confiscating propaganda, seizing records, and jailing leaders. Vested with its new emergency powers, the federal government imposed a crackdown on the entire left with arrests, torture, and summary trials. Vargas, seeking to co-opt Brazil&apos;s fascist movement/paramilitary known as Integralism, led by Plínio Salgado, tolerated a tide of anti-Semitism, and may have targeted Prestes&apos; wife to appease his new supporters. Vargas deported the pregnant, German-Jewish wife of Luís Carlos Prestes, Olga Benario, to Nazi Germany, where she would die in a concentration camp. According to Prestes, he was a virgin until he met Olga Benario. After Vargas started abandoning fascist-style autocracy in 1945 following his rapprochement with the World War II Allies in 1943, political prisoners were released, including Luís Carlos Prestes. Prestes gave an astute assessment of Vargas&apos; politics, commenting, &quot; Getúlio is very flexible. When it was fashionable to be a fascist, he was a fascist. Now that it is fashionable to be democratic, he will be a democrat. &quot; Many members of the Brazilian Communist Party were disgusted by Prestes and decided to leave the party [ September 2009 ]. And Prestes was right. Vargas astutely responded to the newly liberal sentiments of a middle class that was no longer fearful of disorder and proletarian discontent by moving away from fascist repression, promising &quot; a new postwar era of liberty &quot; that included amnesty for political prisoners, presidential elections, and the legalization of opposition parties, including the more moderate and weaker Communist Party. When asked how he could give his support to the man who deported his wife to her death, he answered by saying that the good of the common man was above personal disputes. In elections of December 2, 1945, Prestes had the highest number of votes in the elections for the Senate for the Federal District. In 1945 Vargas was ousted by the hard-right in the military partly because of these moves and the Communist movement was persecuted once again. The Party, however, would make another comeback following Brazil&apos;s move toward democratization in the 1950s and early 1960s. Under the presidency of João Goulart (1961–64), a protégé of Getúlio Vargas and another gaúcho from Rio Grande do Sul, the closeness of the government to the historically disenfranchised working class and peasantry and even to the Communist Party under none other than Luís Carlos Prestes was equally remarkable. Interestingly enough, Goulart appeared to have been co-opting the Communist movement in a manner reminiscent of Vargas&apos; co-option of the Integralists shortly, and not coincidentally, before his ouster by reactionary forces. Once again, Prestes would be imprisoned and the Communist movement would be persecuted. The experience, however, of the failed tenente rebellion and Vargas&apos; suppression of the Communist movement left Prestes and some of his comrades sceptical of armed conflict for the rest of his life. His well-cultivated scepticism would later help precipitate the permanent schism between hard-line Maoists and orthodox Marxist-Leninists in the Brazilian Communist Party in the early 1960s. Prestes went on to lead the pro-Soviet faction of the party known as the Brazilian Communist Party or PCB while the Maoists formed the Communist Party of Brazil PCdoB. While the Maoists went underground and engaged in urban combat against the military dictatorship after 1964, Prestes&apos; faction would not do so. In 1970, Prestes went to Moscow with his second wife and children, and only returned to Brazil after the amnesty for political offenders ten years later. After his return to Brazil Prestes later abandoned the PCB without renouncing Marxism. He became a supporter of the Democratic Labour Party (Brazil) and took part in Leonel Brizola &apos;s presidential campaign in 1989. He died in 1990. [ See also ] João Goulart Getúlio Vargas Brazilian Communist Party Tenente revolts [ External links ] A brief overview of the Prestes Column in Brazil 1924-1927 Prestes in Timeline The most important dates of his career. Ciclo revolucionário brasileiro: do Tenentismo ao Estado Novo (in Portuguese) O Velho - A História de Luiz Carlos Prestes (Documentary about the life of Luís Carlos Prestes) [ References ] [ September 2009 ] The Prestes Column: Revolution in Brazil, by Neill Macaulay (1974). [ Prestes, Luis Carlos January 3, 1898 March 7, 1990 ] Category:1898 births Category:1990 deaths Category:People from Rio Grande do Sul Category:Rebels Category:Brazilian Communist Party politicians Category:Brazilian communists Category:Anti-Revisionists Category:Anti-fascists Category:Expatriates in the Soviet Union cs:Luis Carlos Prestes de:Luís Carlos Prestes es:Luís Carlos Prestes fr:Luís Carlos Prestes io:Luís Carlos Prestes he:לואיס קרלוס פרסטס nl:Luís Carlos Prestes pt:Luís Carlos Prestes ru:Престес, Луис Карлос uk:Луїс Карлус Престіс