[ The College of Staten Island Image:CSI seal.jpg 1976 Public Tomás D. Morales, PhD. 2800 Victory Boulevard, Staten Island, NY 10314 Staten Island New York USA 13,092 (Fall 2008) CSI Institutional Profile, Fall 2008 Columbia Blue &amp; Grey Dolphin City University of New York Image:CSI logo.png ] The College of Staten Island (CSI) is one of the eleven four-year senior colleges within in the City University of New York system. Programs in the liberal arts and sciences and professional studies lead to bachelor&apos;s and associate&apos;s degree s. The master&apos;s degree is awarded in 13 professional and liberal arts and sciences fields of study. The College participates in doctoral programs of The City University Graduate School and University Center in Biology, Chemistry, Computer Science, Nursing, Physics, and Psychology. [ History ] It was established in 1976 from the merger of Richmond College (opened in 1965) and Staten Island Community College (opened 1956). Richmond College had been threatened with closure because of New York City &apos;s financial crisis, while the older school, because of its status as a community college, received state support. The merger was particularly logical since the community college offered two year degrees, while Richmond College was an &quot; upper divisional &quot; college (the third in the nation) that offered degrees to those in their third and fourth years of schooling. The College of Staten Island has been located on the grounds of the former Willowbrook State School since 1993. It is the largest campus, in terms of physical size, in New York City. Before the relocation to Willowbrook, the college had a split campus, located at the former Staten Island Community College (in Sunnyside, on Todt Hill ) and Richmond College (in St. George ). The first president of the college, Dr. Edmond Volpe, an American literature scholar, retired in 1994, after having successfully handled the merger of the two colleges and the unification of the two campuses. He was succeeded by Dr. Marlene Springer, as the second president of the college, an English and American literature scholar, under whose leadership the College improved academic standards, introduced two doctoral programs and several master&apos;s programs, raised the level of the faculty, added research institutes, and introduced an Honors College, the Verrazano School, and the CSI High School for International Studies. She retired in August 2007 and was succeeded by Tomás D. Morales, who was awarded an Ed.D. in Educational Administration from SUNY-Albany in 1998, as the third president of the college. He arranged for a free bus from the Staten Island ferry to the Willowbrook campus. On March 22, 2012, the Faculty Senate of the College passed a motion of &quot; no confidence &quot; in Morales and his provost. Less than two months later, on May 10, 2012, Morales announced that he would be leaving the College of Staten Island to become president of California State University at San Bernardino. [ The Campus ] [ May 2010 ] [ May 2010 ] Completed in 1994, the [ 204 acre km2 on ] campus of CSI/CUNY is the largest site for a college in New York City. Set in a park-like landscape, the campus is centrally located on Staten Island. Mature trees and woodlands, flowering trees and ornamental plantings, fields and outdoor athletic facilities, the great lawn, sculpture, and seating areas create a rural oasis in an urban setting. In 2005 an academic building on the campus was converted into the CSI High School for International Studies; the first senior class to graduate from the high school did so in 2009. The high school has since moved off-site to a new, purpose-built facility. Twenty one new and renovated neo-Georgian buildings serve as classrooms, laboratories, facilities buildings and offices. The academic buildings house 300 classrooms, laboratories and instructional spaces, study lounges, department and program offices, and faculty offices. Beginning on July 1, 2011 the campus is now smoke-free, allowing fresh air all over the campus. Smokers are forced to smoke their cigarettes in designated areas on campus only. Smoking anywhere else is strictly prohibited including students cars. Fines are enforced if you are caught lighting up out of the designated areas. North and South Academic Quadrangles are connected by the Alumni Walk, with the Library and Campus Center as focal points. The Center for the Arts is located midway between the Quadrangles at the fountain plaza. The Sports and Recreation Center and the athletic fields are located near the main entrance to the campus. the college of staten island is located in Staten Island, New York. Sixteen works of art, a permanent collection of works either commissioned or purchased through the Art Acquisitions Program of the Dormitory Authority of the State of New York, are installed throughout the campus. The artists and their free-standing sculptures and reliefs are: Vincenzo Amato, Body of Hector/Glaucus; Miriam Bloom, Shooliloo; Fritz Bultman, Garden at Nightfall (extended loan); Chryssa, Untitled; Lucille Friedland, Big Stride (gift of the artist); Red Grooms, Marathon; Sarah Haviland, Staten Island Arch; Jon Isherwood, Borromini&apos;s Task; Zero Higashida, Maquette for a Small Universe; Valerie Jaudon, Untitled; Niki Ketchman, Red Inside; Win Knowlton, Ellipse; Mark Mennin, Torak; Don Porcaro, Moon Marker; and Hans Van de Bovenkamp, Stele in the Wind. [ Astrophysical Observatory ] The [ 16 ft m on ] dome astrophysical observatory was completed in 1996. In addition to serving students in astronomy courses, the facility is used for faculty and student research projects, environment monitoring projects, and community programs. [ Biological Sciences/Chemical Sciences Building ] An ultramodern facility, the building (6S) contains a lecture hall, nine teaching laboratories, faculty offices, research facilities for faculty and students, the Center for Environmental Science, and the Center for Developmental Neuroscience and Developmental Disabilities. [ Advanced Imaging Facility ] Located in Building 6S, the Advanced Imaging Facility houses two transmission electron microscopes, a field-emission scanning electron microscope, a spectral imaging confocal microscope, an atomic force microscope with inverted light microscope for TIRF imaging, and a flow cytometer. The facility is open for use by faculty from all higher education institutions in the region and offers courses for training of advanced undergraduates from the college. [ Campus Center ] The Campus Center (1C) provides facilities for a complete student life including offices for student organizations, food services, health services, a study lounge, chapel, game room, screening room, bookstore, and the studios of WSIA-FM, the student-operated radio station. [ Center for the Arts ] Entered from the Great Lawn and from the Alumni Walk, the Center houses two academic wings for programs in the arts (1P) (Studio Art, Art History, Dance, Dramatic Arts, Music, Music Technology, and Photography) as well as superb public spaces: the 440-seat Clara and Arleigh B. Williamson Theatre, the 900-seat Marlene Springer Concert Hall, a recital hall, a lab theater, lecture halls, two art galleries, and a small conference center. [ Library Building ] (1L) Designed with inviting reading rooms, open shelves, a café, several computer labs and study carrels, the Library research and study facilities are enhanced by computer data-based operations available to all students. The Library Media Services make accessible pedagogical multimedia materials to distant classrooms and laboratories by means of the campus fiber-optic network. { http://www.library.csi.cuny.edu/videoconference } [ Sports and Recreation Center ] This [ 77000 sqft m2 on ] multipurpose facility and surrounding athletic fields serve the intercollegiate and intramural sports and recreation programs. On a membership basis, faculty, staff, alumni, and the general public also have access to the facilities. The Sports and Recreation Center is building 1R on campus. [ Special programs ] New Student Orientation New students are welcomed through a unique orientation program called CLUE, the College Life Unit Experience. In addition to helping new students make a smooth transition to college life, CLUE gives new students the opportunity to have meaningful exchanges with faculty, staff, and current students. Baccalaureate Program for first-year students meeting senior college admissions standards. Teacher Education Honors Academy Macaulay Honors College Departmental Honors Program Verrazano School Program for high achieving students. Study-Abroad programs through the Center for International Service. University Skills Immersion Program provides academic preparation for first-year students. Tutoring through the Academic Support Center for students with deficiencies in the academic skills and subject matter. Adults Returning to the Classroom (ARC), introductory courses at off-campus locations. Internships with government agencies and in the private sector. [ Notable alumni ] [ Suspect in D.C. Metro bomb plot sought to fight U.S. troops overseas, records say Spencer S. Hsu The Washington Post October 29, 2010 http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2010/10/28/AR2010102803082.html October 30, 2010 ] [ http://iis.stat.wright.edu/sos/bio_Presenters/joanne_Bland.htm Joanne Bland&apos;s Biography The State of the State: Equity, Opportunity &amp; Diversity in Ohio 28 January 2012 ] Farooque Ahmed, alleged bomb plotter Joanne Bland, civil rights activist Justin Brannan, musician, writer, political activist Gene Simmons, Lead Singer of Kiss, attended Richmond College before it merged with Staten Island Community College. Noam Germain, Pharmaceutical Marketing / Brand Development Vinny Guadagnino, Jersey Shore cast member [ Student Life Organizations/Publications ] { English } { no } [ The Third Rail ] [ November 2010 ] The Third Rail is the literary political arts magazine of the College of Staten Island (CSI) and publishes semesterly. Fully embracing W.E.B. DuBois&apos; notion that &quot; art is propaganda, &quot; and in the tradition of “FIRE!” the groundbreaking political arts magazine founded and destroyed during the Harlem Renaissance. The Third Rail features Poetry • Political Commentaries • Philosophy • PhotographyArts • Fiction • Non-Fiction • Drawings • Social Commentaries, Plays &amp; everything in the nature of the political arts &apos;&apos;Third Rail has won the Independent Press Associations (IPA) 2003 Journalism Award for Best Reporting. Third Rail has been placed on The Nations “One of Our Favorite College Papers” list. The spring 2007 issue of Third Rail which focused on student apathy featured a cover shot of two nude students, one male, and one female. As a result of this cover the issue has constantly been stolen from school racks and dumped in trash cans. This has prompted the first ever second printing of a single issue. The ongoing story of the battle over censorship has been covered by the Student Press Law Center and Staten Island Advance. [ WSIA ] [ WSIA ] WSIA is the campus radio station. It airs jazz, rock, and urban formatted content in addition to talk radio. [ References ] [ External links ] [ New York City University ] College of Staten Island Short history of the college CSI High School for International Studies CSI Today Online News Magazine [ 40 36 00 N 74 09 00 W title type:edu_region:US-NY ] Category:City University of New York Category:American Association of State Colleges and Universities Staten Island, College of Category:Universities and colleges in New York City Category:Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools Category:Universities and colleges in Staten Island Category:Coalition of Urban and Metropolitan Universities ja:ニューヨーク市立大学スタテンアイランド校