Instant coffee in a glass jar. Instant coffee, also called soluble coffee and coffee powder, is a beverage derived from brewed coffee bean s. Instant coffee is commercially prepared by either freeze-drying or spray drying, after which it can be rehydrated. Instant coffee in a concentrated liquid form is also available. { http://www.cafeculture.com/cafeindustry/cultured-products/torq-natural-instant-coffee } Advantages of instant coffee include speed of preparation (instant coffee dissolves instantly in hot water), lower shipping weight and volume than beans or ground coffee (to prepare the same amount of beverage), and long shelf life —though instant coffee can also spoil if not kept dry. [ History ] Instant coffee was invented in 1901 by Satori Kato, a Japan ese scientist working in Chicago. Kato introduced the powdered substance in Buffalo, New York, at the Pan-American Exposition. { Carlisle, Rodney (2004). Scientific American Inventions and Discoveries, p.355. John Wiley &amp; Songs, Inc., New Jersey. ISBN 0-471-24410-4. } George Constant Louis Washington developed his own instant coffee process shortly thereafter, and first marketed it commercially (1910). The Nescafé brand, which introduced a more advanced coffee refining process, was launched in 1938. High-vacuum freeze-dried coffee was developed shortly after World War II, as an indirect result of wartime research into other areas. The National Research Corp. was formed in Massachusetts as a process-development company employing high-vacuum technology. It developed high-vacuum processes to produce penicillin, blood plasma and streptomycin for US military use. As the war ended, NRC looked to adapt its processes for peacetime uses. It formed Florida Foods Corp. to produce concentrated orange juice powder, and originally sold its product to the United States Army. That company later changed its name to Minute Maid. [ Use ] Instant coffee is available in powder or granulated form contained in glass jars, sachets or tins. The user controls the strength of the resulting product, by adding more or less powder to the water, ranging from thin &quot; coffee water &quot; to very strong and almost syrupy coffee. A novel way is to use coffee bags, similar to tea bags. Instant coffee is also convenient for preparing iced coffee like the Greek frappé, which is popular in warmer climates and hot seasons. [ October 2011 ] In some countries such as Portugal, Spain and India, instant coffee is commonly mixed with hot milk instead of boiling water. [ Production ] As with regular coffee, the green coffee bean itself is first roasted to bring out flavour and aroma. Rotating cylinders containing the green beans and hot combustion gases are used in most roasting plants. When the bean temperature reaches 165 °C the roasting begins, accompanied by a popping sound similar to that produced by popcorn. These batch cylinders take about 8–15 minutes to complete roasting with about 25-75% efficiency. Coffee roasting using a fluidized bed only takes from thirty seconds to four minutes, and it operates at lower temperatures which allows greater retention of the coffee bean aroma and flavor. The beans are then ground finely. Grinding reduces the beans to [ 0.5 - 1.1 mm on ] pieces in order to allow the coffee to be put in solution with water for the drying stage. Sets of scored rollers designed to crush rather than cut the bean are used. Once roasted and ground, the coffee is dissolved in water. This stage is called extraction. Water is added in 5-10 percolation columns at temperatures of 155 to 180 °C; this concentrates the coffee solution to about 15-30% coffee by mass. This may be further concentrated before the drying process begins by either vacuum evaporation or freeze concentration. [ Freeze drying ] Production freeze-drier. The basic principle of freeze drying is the removal of water by sublimation. Since the mass production of instant coffee began in post-WWII America, freeze-drying has grown in popularity to become a common method. Although it is sometimes more expensive, it generally results in a higher-quality product. Agglomerated wet coffee granules are rapidly frozen (slow freezing leads to large ice crystals and a porous product and can also affect the colour of the coffee granules). Frozen coffee is placed in the drying chamber, often on metal trays. A vacuum is created within the chamber. The strength of the vacuum is critical in the speed of the drying and therefore the quality of the product. Care must be taken to produce a vacuum of suitable strength. The drying chamber is warmed, most commonly by radiation but conduction is used in some plants and convection has been proposed in some small pilot plants. A possible problem with convection is uneven drying rates within the chamber, which would give an inferior product. Condensation - the previously frozen water in the coffee granules expands to ten times its previous volume. The removal of this water vapor from the chamber is vitally important, making the condenser the most critical and expensive component in a freeze-drying plant. The freeze-dried granules are removed from the chamber and packaged. [ Spray drying ] Laboratory-scale spray dryer. A=Solution or suspension to be dried in, B=Atomization gas in, 1= Drying gas in, 2=Heating of drying gas, 3=Spraying of solution or suspension, 4=Drying chamber, 5=Part between drying chamber and cyclone, 6=Cyclone, 7=Drying gas is taken away, 8=Collection vessel of product, arrows mean that this is co-current lab-spraydryer Spray drying is preferred to freeze drying in some cases because of its economy, short drying time, usefulness when dealing with such a heat-sensitive product, and the fine, rounded particles it produces. Spray drying produces spherical particles about [ 300 µm ] size with a density of 0.22 g/cm³ (ref 2). To achieve this, nozzle atomization is used. Various ways of nozzle atomization can be used each having its own advantages and disadvantages. High speed rotating wheels operating at speeds of about 20,000 rpm are able to process up to 60,000 pounds (27 tonnes) of solution per hour (ref 3). The use of spray wheel s requires that the drying towers have a wide radius to avoid the atomized droplets collecting onto the drying chamber walls. Completed in 5–30 seconds (dependent on factors such as heat, size of particle, and diameter of chamber). Moisture content change: IN = 75-85% OUT = 3-3.5% Air temperature: IN = 270  °C OUT = 110  °C One drawback with spray drying is that the particles it produces are too fine to be used effectively by the consumer; they must first be either steam-fused in towers similar to spray dryers or by belt agglomeration to produce particles of suitable size. [ Decaffelkkjj ] [ Decaffeination ] In commercial processes the decaffeination of instant coffee almost always happens before the critical roasting process which will determine the coffee&apos;s flavour and aroma processes. [ Composition ] The caffeine content of instant coffee is generally less than that of brewed coffee. One study comparing various home-prepared samples came to the result that regular instant coffee (not decaffeinated) has a median caffeine content of 66  mg per cup (range 30–120  mg per cup), with a median cup size of 225 ml (range 170-290 ml) and a caffeine concentration of 328 µl/ml (range 100-560 µl/ml). [ 1032351 ] In comparison, drip or filter coffee was estimated to have a median caffeine content of 110  mg, with a median concentration of 620 µl/ml for the same cup size. Regarding antioxidants, the polyphenol content of a 180 ml cup of instant coffee has been estimated to be approximately 320  mg, compared to approximately 400  mg in a cup of brewed coffee of the same size. [ 10.1016/j.phrs.2007.01.006 ] [ Health effects ] [ Health effects of coffee ] Compared to regular drip brew coffee, instant coffee appears to be as efficient in decreasing the risk of diabetes type 2. [ 10.2337/diacare.29.02.06.dc05-1512 ] On the other hand, it has been associated with an increased risk of bladder cancer in women when compared to regular coffee, whereas for men both instant and regular coffee has been associated with an increased bladder cancer risk. [ 6928984 ] However, current review research suggests that there is no dose-response relationship between coffee drinking and bladder cancer, and that previous studies may have been confounded by unidentified risks of bladder cancer. { http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19077567 } Instant coffee decreases intestinal iron absorption more than drip coffee. One study estimated that, when a cup of instant coffee was ingested with a meal composed of semipurified ingredients, intestinal absorption was reduced from 5.88% to 0.97%, compared to an absorption of 1.64% with drip coffee. [ 6402915 ] It was also estimated that, when the strength of the instant coffee was doubled, intestinal iron absorption fell to 0.53%. Apparently, however, there is no decrease in iron absorption when instant coffee is consumed 1 hour before a meal, but the same degree of inhibition as with simultaneous ingestion occurs when instant coffee is taken 1 hour after a meal. Animal experiments have indicated that instant coffee confers no risk related to reproduction, lactation, embryotoxicity or teratogenicity, but possibly a risk of a delay in bone calcification in high doses. [ 10.1016/0041-008X(81)90421-X ] [ Regulatory context ] In the EU, regulations include the following details: Species of coffee bean Geographical origin Processing detail Year of crop Solvents used in decaffeination Caffeine level Various institutions govern the coffee industry and help to achieve standardisation and also release information to the public. International Coffee Organisation (London) Codex Alimentarius Commission of the UN (Rome) National Coffee Association (New York) [ Non-food use ] Instant coffee is one of the ingredients in &quot; Caffenol-C &quot;, { Comparison of different Caffenol formulas } a home-made, non-toxic black-and-white photographic developer. The other ingredients in the basic formula are ascorbic acid and anhydrous sodium carbonate; some recipes also include potassium bromide as a fog-reducing agent. The active ingredient appears to be caffeic acid. Initial experiments on Caffenol were performed in 1995 at the Rochester Institute of Technology; { A Use for that Last Cup of Coffee: Film and Paper Development Darkroom and Creative Camera Techniques, September/October 1995 } addition of ascorbic acid began around 2000, yielding the improved Caffenol-C, which is less likely to stain negatives than the original formulation. Experiments have shown that cheaper, less desirable brands of coffee work better for this application than more expensive brands. { One recipe for Caffenol-C } [ References ] [ Bibliography ] [ Encyclopedia of Chemical Technology, volume 6 4th Edition Romualdo Verzosa Jr. John Wiley &amp; Sons 1993 0-471-52674-6 ] [ Spray Drying Handbook 5th Edition K Masters 1991 Longman Scientific &amp; Technical 0-582-06266-7 ] [ Encyclopedia of Chemical Processing and Design John J. McKetta Marcel Dekker Inc 1995 0-8247-2604-9 ] [ External links ] How Instant Coffee is Made from Madehow.com [ 1 ] Category:Types of coffee Category:Dried foods Category:Convenience foods Category:1909 introductions Category:Japanese inventions cs:Instantní káva de:Löslicher Kaffee el:Στιγμιαίος καφές eu:Istanteko kafe fr:Café instantané ko:인스턴트 커피 is:Skyndikaffi he:קפה נמס ka:ხსნადი ყავა lt:Tirpi kava nl:Oploskoffie ja:インスタントコーヒー pl:Kawa rozpuszczalna pt:Café solúvel ru:Растворимый кофе sk:Instantná káva sv:Snabbkaffe tr:Hazır kahve vi:Cà phê hòa tan zh:即溶咖啡