[ the mechanical device the ballet The Nutcracker other uses Nutcracker (disambiguation) ] A nutcracker with a functional design A nutcracker is a mechanical device for cracking nuts. Nutcrackers usually work on the principle of moment s as described in Archimedes &apos; analysis of the lever. The earliest use of the term nutcracker in English dates to 1481. [ Functional ] Manufacturers produce modern nutcrackers — designed to crack hazel or cob nuts — usually somewhat resembling pliers, but with the pivot point at the end beyond the nut, rather than in the middle. These are also used for cracking the shells of crab and lobster to make the meat inside available for eating. Nuts have long been a popular choice for desserts, particularly throughout Europe. The nutcrackers were placed on dining tables to serve as a fun and entertaining center of conversation while diners awaited their final course. At one time, nutcrackers were actually made of metals such as brass, and it wasn’t until the 1800’s in Germany that the popularity of wooden ones began to spread. Parrot s use their beak s as natural nutcrackers, in much the same way smaller bird s crack seed s. In this case, the pivot point stands opposite the nut, at the jaw. Some artists, among them the multi-instrumentalist Mike Oldfield, have used the sound nutcrackers make in music. [ Decorative ] A collection of Nutcrackers A variety of figure nutcrackers Nutcrackers in the form of wood en carvings of a soldier, knight, king, or other profession have existed since at least the 15th century. These nutcrackers portray a person with a large mouth which the operator opens by lifting a lever in the back of the figurine. Originally one could insert a nut in the big-toothed mouth, press down and thereby crack the nut. Modern nutcrackers in this style serve mostly for decoration, mainly at Christmas time. The ballet The Nutcracker derives its name from this festive holiday decoration. Nutcrackers have long been a traditional symbol of Christmas. The original nutcrackers first originated in Germany, and were thought to have guardian-like properties because of their strong appearance. The carving of nutcrackers—as well as of religious figures and of crib s — developed as a cottage industry in forest ed rural areas of Germany. The most famous nutcracker carvings come from Sonneberg in Thuringia (also a center of doll making ) and from the Ore Mountains. Wood-carving usually provided the only income for the people living there. Today the travel industry supplements their income by bringing visitors to the remote areas. Steinbach Nutcrackers have become popular in the United States as well, and the recreated &quot; Bavarian village &quot; of Leavenworth, Washington, even features a nutcracker museum. Many other materials also serve to make decorated nutcrackers, such as porcelain, silver, and brass; the museum displays samples. Carvings by famous names like Junghanel, Klaus Mertens, Karl, Olaf Kolbe, Petersen, Christian Ulbricht and especially the Steinbach nutcrackers have become collector s &apos; items. { populuxe nutcracker by the industrial designer } { Maurice Ascalon } The United States Postal Service (USPS) in October 2008 issued four stamps with Nutcrackers for the first time. These featured custom-made Nutcrackers made by Richmond, Virginia, artist Glenn Crider. [ See also ] Wooden toymaking in the Ore Mountains [ External links ] [ Food ] [ Nutcrackers ] Smithsonian Museum Nutcrackers Leavenworth Nutcracker Museum History of Christian Ulbricht Nutcrackers Nutcracker videos on the Internet Bird Collection Category:Christmas traditions Category:Figurines Category:Ore Mountains ar:كسارة الجوز cs:Louskáček de:Nussknacker es:Cascanueces eu:Intxaur-hauskailu fa:فندق‌شکن fr:Casse-noix ko:너트크래커 it:Schiaccianoci nl:Notenkraker (gereedschap) ja:くるみ割り人形 (ドイツ工芸品) no:Nøtteknekker pl:Dziadek do orzechów pt:Quebra-nozes (ferramenta) ru:Щипцы для орехов simple:Nutcracker fi:Pähkinänsärkijä (esine) sv:Nötknäppare tt:Çikləwek Watuçı uk:Лускунчик