{ last glacial maximum, when the sea level was more than 110 m lower than today, is shown in grey. The deep water of the Lombok Strait between Bali and Lombok formed a water barrier even when lower sea levels linked the now-separated islands and landmasses on either side. } The Wallace Line (or Wallace&apos;s Line) is an imaginary line drawn in 1859 separating the ecozones of Asia and Wallacea, a transitional zone between Asia and Australia. West of the line are found organisms related to Asiatic species; to the east, a mixture of species of Asian and Australian origin is present. The line is named after Alfred Russel Wallace, who noticed this clear division during his travels through the East Indies in the 19th century. The line runs through Indonesia, between Borneo and Sulawesi (Celebes), and through the Lombok Strait between Bali and Lombok. Antonio Pigafetta had also recorded the biological contrasts between the Philippines and the Maluku Islands (Spice Islands) (on opposite sides of the line) in 1521 during the continuation of the voyage of Ferdinand Magellan, after Magellan had been killed on Mactan. The distance between Bali and Lombok is small, about [ 35 km ]. The distributions of many bird species observe the line, since many birds do not cross even the smallest stretches of open ocean water. Some bat s have distributions that cross the line, but other mammals are generally limited to one side or the other; an exception is the Crab-eating Macaque. Other groups of plants and animals show differing patterns, but the overall pattern is striking and reasonably consistent. Flora do not follow the Wallace line to the same extent as Fauna. [ 10.1111/j.1095-8312.2011.01647.x ] [ Biogeography ] Understanding of the biogeography of the region centres on the relationship of ancient sea level s to the continental shelves. Wallace&apos;s Line is visible geographically when the continental shelf contours are examined; it can be seen as a deep-water channel that marks the southeastern edge of the Sunda Shelf linking Borneo, Bali, Java, and Sumatra underwater to the mainland of southeastern Asia. Australia is likewise connected via the shallow ocean over the Sahul Shelf to New Guinea; and the related biogeographic boundary known as Lydekker&apos;s Line, which separates the eastern edge of Wallacea and the Australian region, has a similar origin. During ice age glacial advances, when the ocean levels were up to 120 m lower, both Asia and Australia were united with what are now islands on their respective continental shelves as continuous land masses, but the deep water between those two large continental shelf areas was, for over 50 million years, a barrier that kept the flora and fauna of Australia separated from those of Asia. Wallacea consists of islands that were never recently connected by dry land to either of the continental land masses, and thus were populated by organisms capable of crossing the straits between islands. &quot; Weber&apos;s Line &quot; runs through this transitional area (to the east of centre), at the tipping point between dominance by species of Asian against those of Australian origin. [ Mayr E. Wallace&apos;s Line in the Light of Recent Zoogeographic Studies The Quarterly Review of Biology 19 1 1–14 1944 2808563 ] [ See also ] [ Indonesia ] Australia (continent) Lydekker&apos;s Line Wallacea Weber&apos;s Line [ References ] van Oosterzee, Penny (1997). Where Worlds Collide: the Wallace Line. Pleistocene Sea Level Maps Wallacea - a transition zone from Asia to Australia, specially rich in marine life and on land. Dawkins, Richard (2004). The Ancestor&apos;s Tale. Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson. ISBN 0-7538-1996-1. Chapter 14 - Marsupials. [ Borneo ] Abdullah, M. T. (2003). Biogeography and variation of Cynopterus brachyotis in Southeast Asia. PhD thesis. The University of Queensland, St Lucia, Australia. Hall, L. S., Gordon G. Grigg, Craig Moritz, Besar Ketol, Isa Sait, Wahab Marni and M. T. Abdullah (2004). &quot; Biogeography of fruit bats in Southeast Asia &quot;. Sarawak Museum Journal LX(81):191-284. Wilson D. E., D. M. Reeder (2005). Mammal species of the world. Washington DC: Smithsonian Institution Press. [ External links ] Too Many Lines; The Limits of the Oriental and Australian Zoogeographic Regions George Gaylord Simpson, Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society, Vol. 121, No. 2 (Apr. 29, 1977), pp.  107–120 Wallacea Research Group Map of Wallace&apos;s, Weber&apos;s and Lydekker&apos;s lines Category:Biogeography Category:Ecoregions of Indonesia Category:Natural history of Indonesia Category:Indomalaya ecozone biota Category:Australasian ecozone biota - Category:Celebes Sea bs:Wallaceova linija ca:Línia de Wallace cs:Wallaceova linie cy:Llinell Wallace da:Wallace-linjen de:Wallace-Linie es:Línea de Wallace eo:Linio de Wallace eu:Wallace Lerroa fr:Ligne Wallace ko:월리스 선 hr:Wallaceova linija id:Garis Wallace it:Linea di Wallace lt:Voliso linija hu:Wallace-vonal ms:Garis Wallace nl:Wallacelijn ja:ウォレス線 no:Wallacelinjen pnb:ویلس لیک pl:Linia Wallace&apos;a pt:Linha de Wallace ru:Линия Уоллеса simple:Wallace Line sr:Воласова линија fi:Wallacen linja sv:Wallacelinjen tr:Wallace Çizgisi uk:Лінія Воллеса vi:Đường Wallace zh:華萊士線