[ Oystercatchers Haematopus_longirostris_2.jpg Pied Oystercatcher (Haematopus longirostris) Animal ia Chordata Aves Charadriiformes Haematopodidae Bonaparte, 1838 Haematopus Linnaeus, 1758 Species See text. ] American Oystercatcher The oystercatchers are a group of wader s; they form the family Haematopodidae, which has a single genus, Haematopus. They are found on coasts worldwide apart from the polar regions and some tropical regions of Africa and South East Asia. The exception to this is the Eurasian Oystercatcher and the South Island Oystercatcher, both of which breed inland, far inland in some cases. In the past there has been a great deal of confusion as to the species limits, with discrete populations of all black oystercatchers being afforded specific status but pied oystercatchers being considered one single species. { Hockey, P (1996) Family Haematopodidae (Oystercatchers) in del Hoyo, J.; Elliot, A. &amp; Sargatal, J. (editors). (1996). } { Handbook of the Birds of the World. Volume 3: Hoatzin to Auks. Lynx Edicions. ISBN 84-87334-20-2 } The name oystercatcher was coined by Mark Catesby in 1731 as a common name for the North America n species H. palliatus, described as eating oyster s. [ The Oxford Dictionary of British Bird Names Lockwood W B 1993 OUP 978-0-19-866196-2 ] Yarrell in 1843 established this as the preferred term, replacing the older name Sea Pie. [ Appearance and habits ] The different species of oystercatcher show little variation in shape or appearance. They range from [ 39 - 50 cm in on ] in length and [ 72 - 91 cm in on ] in wingspan. The Eurasian Oystercatcher is the lightest on average, at [ 526 g lb on ], while the Sooty Oystercatcher is the heaviest, at [ 833 g lb on ]. { CRC Handbook of Avian Body Masses by John B. Dunning Jr. (Editor). CRC Press (1992), ISBN 978-0-8493-4258-5. } The plumage of all species is either all-black, or black (or dark brown) on top and white underneath. The Variable Oystercatcher is slightly exceptional in being either all-black or pied. They are large, obvious, and noisy plover -like bird s, with massive long orange or red bills used for smashing or prying open mollusc s. The bill shape varies between species, according to the diet. Those birds with blade-like bill tips pry open or smash mollusc shells, and those with pointed bill tips tend to probe for annelid worms. They show sexual dimorphism, with females being longer-billed and heavier than males. The diet of oystercatchers varies with location. Species occurring inland feed upon earthworm s and insect larvae. The diet of coastal oystercatchers is more varied, although dependent upon coast type; on estuaries bivalve s, gastropod s and polychaete worms are the most important part of the diet, whereas rocky shore oystercatchers prey upon limpets, mussel s, gastropods, and chiton s. Other prey items include echinoderm s, fish, and crabs. Nearly all species of oystercatcher are monogamous, although there are reports of polygamy in the Eurasian Oystercatcher. They are territorial during the breeding season (with a few species defending territories year round). There is strong mate and site fidelity in the species that have been studied, with one record of a pair defending the same site for 20 years. A single nesting attempt is made per breeding season, which is timed over the summer months. The nests of oystercatchers are simple affairs, scrapes in the ground which may be lined, and placed in a spot with good visibility. The eggs of oystercatchers are spotted and cryptic. Between one and four eggs are laid, with three being typical in the Northern Hemisphere and two in the south. Incubation is shared but not proportionally, females tend to take more incubation and males engage in more territory defence. Incubation varies by species, lasting between 24–39 days. Oystercatchers are also known to practice &quot; egg dumping. &quot; Like the cuckoo, they sometimes lay their eggs in the nests of other species such as seagulls, abandoning them to be raised by those birds. { Birds Dumping Eggs on the Neighbors } One species of oystercatcher became extinct during the 20th century, the Canarian Oystercatcher. Another species, the Chatham Oystercatcher, which is endemic to the Chatham Islands of New Zealand, is listed as endangered by the IUCN, and the African Oystercatcher is considered near threatened. In the past there has been conflict with commercial shellfish farmers, but studies have found that the impact of oystercatchers is much smaller than that of shore crabs. [ Species ] &lt; onlyinclude &gt; Species in taxonomic order Common name Binomial Image Magellanic Oystercatcher H. leucopodus 150px Blackish Oystercatcher H. ater 150px Black Oystercatcher H. bachmani 150px American Oystercatcher H. palliatus 150px Canarian Oystercatcher H. meadewaldoi † 150px African Oystercatcher H. moquini 150px Eurasian Oystercatcher H. ostralegus 150px Pied Oystercatcher H. longirostris 150px South Island Oystercatcher H. finschi 150px Chatham Oystercatcher H. chathamensis Variable Oystercatcher H. unicolor 150px Sooty Oystercatcher H. fuliginosus 150px [ References ] [ Haematopodidae ] [ External links ] ARKive - images and movies of the oystercatcher &apos;&apos;(Haematopus ostralegus)&apos;&apos; Oystercatcher videos on the Internet Bird Collection Webcam Roof-breeding oystercatcher in Bergen * Category:Shorebirds ar:صائد المحار be:Кулікі-сарокі br:Morbig ca:Hematopòdid de:Austernfischer (Gattung) es:Haematopodidae eo:Hematopedoj fa:صدف‌خوار fr:Huîtrier fy:Strânljippen ga:Roilleach it:Haematopodidae he:שלצדפיים sw:Kizamiachaza lt:Jūrinės šarkos hu:Csigaforgatófélék ml:കക്കകൊത്തി nl:Scholeksters ja:ミヤコドリ属 frr:Liiwen no:Tjeldfamilien nn:Tjeldfamilien pl:Ostrygojady pt:Ostraceiro ru:Кулики-сороки simple:Oystercatcher fi:Meriharakat sv:Strandskator tr:Poyraz kuşugiller uk:Кулик-сорока (рід) zea:Zeêlieven zh:蠣鷸科