[ auto Euskotren Trena Euskotren Trena logo.jpg Logotype of Euskotren Trena 250px Euskotren Trena units 250px Euskotren Trena units at Amara station Eusko Trenbideak Biscay, Gipuzkoa ( Basque Country ) Commuter rail Inter-city rail 8 69 8, Atxuri Street, Bilbao, Biscay +34 902 54 32 10 1982 Eusko Trenbideak ] Euskotren Trena, formerly known just as Euskotren is a commuter, Inter-city and Urban transit train operating company that operates local and inter-city passenger services in the provinces of Biscay and Gipuzkoa, in the Basque Country. It is one of the four commercial brands under the which Basque Railways operates, as a public company managed by the Basque Government. The entire network uses narrow gauge rail tracks which belong to the Basque Government since their transference from the Spanish government; the rail tracks and stations were part of the Feve network until its transference. Euskotren Trena operates the railway services and networks, while Euskotren Tranbia operates the tram networks, Euskotren Autobusa the bus services and Euskotren Kargo the freight rail services. Since 2006 Euskotren Trena is the commercial brand for the operator of the railway network in the Basque Country, which is Eusko Trenbideak, while the network itself is owned by the public entity Euskal Trenbide Sarea. In 2012 the commercial brand was changed from simply Euskotren to Euskotren Trena, with the word trena being Basque for &quot; train &quot;. [ Services ] [ Introduction ] { Donostia-San Sebastián. } Euskotren Trena operates the railway network owned by Euskal Trenbide Sarea (Basque Railway Network) in the Basque provinces of Biscay and Gipuzkoa, as well as a small track and a station in Pyrénées-Atlantiques department of France. The initial network was a continuation of the Feve (narrow gauge railways) regional services and FTS (Bilbao&apos;s metropolitan railways and transportation) urban services. The services have since then improved to become a commuter rail system along with Inter-city rail services. The network connects the city of Bilbao with municipalities across the Greater Bilbao area and the province of Biscay, as Durango, Bermeo and Lezama. In the province of Gipuzkoa it connects the city of Donostia-San Sebastián with other cities and towns as Zarautz, Lasarte-Oria, Irun and Hendaye, the latter one in France. The Inter-city rail services connect the cities of Bilbao and San Sebastián with each other and with Hendaye. Euskotren Trena is operated by Eusko Trenbideak. [ Lines ] Map of the network (includes the &apos;&apos;Euskotren Tranbia&apos;&apos; lines). The Euskotren Trena network consists of the following lines: 19px Bilbao-Donostia line - Inter-city rail service from Bilbao-Atxuri to Donostia-Amara. 19px Durangaldea line - Bilbao-Atxuri to Ermua. 19px Kostaldea line - Ermua to Donostia-Amara. 19px Tranbia Ermua-Eibar line - Local service from Ermua to Eibar 19px Topo line - Lasarte-Oria to Hendaye through Donostia-Amara. Named &quot; topo &quot;, meaning &quot; mole &quot;. 19px Urdaibai line - Bilbao-Atxuri to Bermeo. 19px Txorierri line - Casco Viejo Station (Bilbao) to Lezama (the Deusto - Casco Viejo section was closed in May 15, 2010 and it&apos;s being re-developed for Metro Bilbao ). 19px Larreineta funicular - Funicular line from Escontrilla to Larreineta. 19px Azpeitia-Lasao line - Steam locomotive from Azpeitia to Lasao, turstical part of the Basque Museum of Railways. 19px Airport line - Under constuction, it will connect the district of Uribarri with the Bilbao Airport. The network interchanges with the Euskotren Tranbia line, Metro Bilbao, Feve, Renfe and Cercanías services. The Euskotren trena lines do not appear with the rest of lines in standard printed network maps, but separate maps are available. The Euskotren Trena lines appear along the rest railways networks of the Basque Country in the service Moveuskadi.com, offered by the Basque Government. [ Former or closed lines ] Sections of the Txorierri line. The railway service in the Txorierri line between Casco Viejo and Deusto was suspended on May, 2010 and for a period of three years, because of the construction of Line 3 of Metro Bilbao. The closed stations are Deusto, Unibertsitatea, Matiko and Zumalakarregi. The Louri-Ciudad Jardín station, formerly closed, was open to give closer service to the users of the now closed stations. Urola line. The Urola line, formerly served by the Urola Railway, was closed by Eusko Trenbideak in 1986, after a futile attempt to renovate it. The service was replaced by a bus line between the municipalities of Zumaia and Zumarraga. Bilbao-Plentzia line. Bilbao-Plentzia was the line with the most users at the time of its closure. The original line connected downtown Bilbao, starting at Casco Viejo Station with the town of Plentzia, at Plentzia Station. During the construction of the Line 1 of Metro Bilbao, it was decided that the section between San Inazio and Plentzia would be managed by Metro Bilbao, as part of line 1, instead of Euskotren. The Casco Viejo Station was then connected to the Txorierri line, and the Ciudad Jardín and Mallona stations were closed (due their proximity to the station in Casco Viejo). The Deusto-San Inazio section was eventually closed due the construction of a new highway were the railtracks were located. Lutxana-Sondika line. The line between Sondika and Lutxana (in Barakaldo ), both in the Greater Bilbao area was closed in 1996 after an attempt of re-opening it for passenger services. However, the railtracks are still in use; Euskotren Trena uses it for testing new units. [ Service frequencies ] Lugaritz station As of May 2012, typical services frequencies for weekdays are: { Schedules at Euskotren Trena&apos;s Official Website } Bilbao-Donostia line - one train per hour between Bilbao-Atxuri and Donostia-Amara and two express trains per day. Durangaldea line - two trains per hour between Bilbao-Atxuri and Ermua in each direction, with one continuing to Donostia-Amara. Kostaldea line - one train per hour between Ermua and Donostia-Amara in each direction (the ones starting at Donostia-Amara continuing to Bilbao-Atxuri). Tranbia Ermua-Eibar line - three trains per hour between Ermua and Eibar in each direction. Topo line - three trains per hour between Lasarte-Oria and Irun, with two continuing to Hendaye. Two trains per hour between Hendaye and Lasarte-Oria. Urdaibai line - two trains per hour between Bilbao-Atxuri and Bermeo in each direction. Txorierri line - two trains per hour between Casco Viejo and Lezama in each direction. Three trains per hour during peak times. Larreineta funicular - one funicular per hour between Larreineta and Escontrilla. Two per hour during peak times. [ Stations ] The Euskotren Trena network serves the following stations (the Bilbao-Donostia line stations are included in the sections of Durangaldea and Kostaldea): Bilbao-Atxuri Bolueta Etxebarri Ariz Zuhatzu-Galdakao Usansolo Bedia Lemoa Amorebieta Euba Durago Fauste Landako-Durango Traña-Abadiño Berriz Zaldibar Ermua Ermua Ardantza Eibar Toletxagain Altzola Mendaro Deba Arroa Zumaia Zarautz San Pelaio Aia-Orio Usurbil Errekalde Añorga Lugaritz Donostia-Amara Ermua Errotabarri San Lorentzo Unibertsitatea Amaña Ardantza Eibar Azitain Lasarte-Oria Errekalde Añorga Lugaritz Donostia-Amara Anoeta Loiola Herrera Pasaia Galtzaraborda Errenteria Fanderia Oiartzun Gaintxurizketa Irun-Bentak Belaskoenea Irun Ficoba Hendaia Bilbao-Atxuri Bolueta Etxebarri Ariz Zuhatzu-Galdakao Usansolo Bedia Lemoa Amorebieta Geralekua Zugastieta Muxika Lurgorri Gernika Institutoa Forua Busturia-San Kristobal Busturia-Axpe Busturia-Itsasbegi Mundaka Bermeo Durangaldea line Kostaldea line Tranbia line Topo line Urdaibai line Casco Viejo Loruri-Ciudad Jardín Ola Sondika Larrondo Elotxalerri Derio Lekunbiz Zamudio Kurtzea Lezama Txorierri line [ Current operations ] Eusko Trenbideak, who operates the Euskotren Trena brand has its central offices in the Bilbao-Atxuri Station, in the district of Ibaiondo, in Bilbao. There are operations centres in several stations, including those of Durango and Donostia-San Sebastián. Currently, the rolling stock is maintained at depots in Durango, Barakaldo and Errenteria. New depots are being built in Abadiño and Irun. [ Ticketing ] Euskotren Trena uses both regular paper tickets and the Creditrans travel ticket, available only on some lines. Users can acquire single tickets and return tickets at the vending machines available at every station, monthly and yearly travel cards are also available. Young people and elder people also may acquire special tickets. { Tickets at Euskotren Trena official website] } The Creditrans travel ticket is only available in the Txorierri line, and cannot be used on any other line of the network. The Barik electronic card will be available in all lines once it is implemented. The ticket pricing is based on zone-based rules. [ Rolling stock ] Euskotren Trena counts with several trains from four different series, named UT200, UT300, UT3500 and the newest UT900, all of them produced by CAF. As the whole network is electrified, all the units are electric. The oldest are the trains from the UT3500 series, which started operations in the 1970s as a replacement for the old trains, in very bad state, of the Ferrocarriles Vascongados. The UT900 series use state-of-the-art technology and started operations in 2011. [ Current fleet ] Class Image Type Top speed (km/h) Cars per set Routes operated Built Notes UT-900 Electric multiple unit 100 4 Topo line Durangaldea line 2011–present New units started operating in the Topo line. Set to replace UT3500. UT-300 100px Electric multiple unit 90 3 Txorierri line Bilbao-Donostia inter-city line (express service) 1990 Operate in the Txorierri line, red-coloured units in the Bilbao-Donostia line. UT-200 100px Electric multiple unit 80 4 Bilbao-Donostia inter-city line Topo line Urdaibai line Kostaldea line 1985 UT-3500 100px Electric multiple unit 80 3 Durangaldea line Tranbia Ermua-Eibar Urdaibai line 1977 To be replaced by the UT900 series. [ Past fleet ] Class Image Type Top speed (km/h) Cars per set Routes operated Built Notes UT-3100 100px Electric multiple unit 75 3 Bilbao-Donostia line 1988 UT-3150 Electric multiple unit 70 1 Tranbia Ermua-Eibar 1989–1990 Transformation of the MCD series. [ Livery ] Previous Euskotren logo (still seen in stations and trains). The new rolling stock (UT-900) is painted with the new Euskotren Trena livery, they are of white colour with black contrasts and blue and orange circles in the doors. Older rolling stock mantains the blue and white colours, usual in Euskotren since 2002. [ Current developments ] The developments of the network operated by Eusko Trenbideak, under the commercial brand of Euskotren Trena, are being conducted by Euskal Trenbide Sarea, who has the competences over the Basque railway network. The developments do not include any expansion of the lines or new lines, something not yet proposed or planned, but the improvements of the current network, with new stations, alternate routes and a second rail track in areas where there is only one, as well as the elimination, or at least reduction, of all the level crossing s. [ http://www.elcorreo.com/vizcaya/20090806/vizcaya/desdoblamiento-ferrea-hasta-abadino-20090806.html El desdoblamiento de la vía férrea hasta Abadiño enfilara en otoño su recta final El Correo ] [ http://www.elcorreo.com/vizcaya/v/20111126/duranguesado/arriola-vuelve-retrasar-obras-20111126.html Arriola vuelve a retrasar las obras del soterramiento a mediados de 2013 El Correo ] [ http://www.diariovasco.com/v/20110811/bajo-deba/avanza-remodelacion-antigua-estacion-20110811.html Avanza la remodelación de la antigua estación de EuskoTren El Diario Vasco ] [ http://www.elcorreo.com/vizcaya/v/20101228/guipuzcoa/tramo-ferroviario-entre-txarakua-20101228.html El tramo ferroviario entre Txarakua y Azitain tendrá doble vía para mediados del 2012 El Correo ] New station in Eibar, with a cost of 0.2m €, which renews the whole station with the adding of elevators, supress of level crossings and the incorporation of new platforms. Txarakua-Azitain section. The incorporation of a second rail track to improve frequencies. It is scheduled to be opened in late 2012. [ See also ] Eusko Trenbideak - Ferrocarriles Vascos [ References ] [ External links ] Euskotren Official Webpage Euskotran Official Webpage Bizkaibus Official Webpage Lurraldebus Official Webpage Euskotren&apos;s schedules Euskal Trenbide Sarea Category:Railway companies of Spain Category:Basque companies Category:Metre gauge railways in Spain Category:EuskoTren Category:Rail transport in the Basque Country (autonomous community) Category:Basque Government Category:Government-owned companies of Spain ast:Eusko Trenbideak - Ferrocarriles Vascos ca:Euskotren de:EuskoTren et:EuskoTren es:EuskoTren eu:EuskoTren fr:EuskoTren gl:EuskoTren nl:EuskoTren ja:バスク鉄道 ru:EuskoTren