[ Trier-Saarburg Rhineland-Palatinate Trier Trier 1101 07235 138,196 2001 127 TR rhineland_p_tr.png ] Trier-Saarburg is a district in the west of Rhineland-Palatinate, Germany. Neighboring districts are (from the north and clockwise) Bitburg-Prüm, Bernkastel-Wittlich, Birkenfeld, Sankt Wendel (Saarland), and Merzig-Wadern (Saarland). To the west it borders Luxembourg. The district-free city Trier is completely surrounded by the district. [ History ] The district was created in 1969 by merging the previous districts Trier and Saarburg. [ Geography ] The main river in the district is the Moselle. The area between its tributaries, the Ruwer and the Saar, is also well known as one of the prime wine regions of Germany. [ Museums ] Roscheider Hof Open Air Museum, Konz Fell Exhibition Slate Mine Air museum, Hermeskeil Railway and steam engine museum, Hermeskeil [ Coat of arms ] Coat of arms The coat of arms largely resembles the coat of arms of the Saarburg district. The castle in the middle shows the castle of Saarburg, even though now only the ruins of the castle remains. The red cross is the cross of Trier, as a large part of the Saarburg district (as well as of the new Trier-Saarburg district) historically belonged to the state of Trier. The blue bars were added after the merging with the Trier district, and symbolize that part of that district historically belonged to Luxembourg. [ Towns and municipalities ] | 1. Hermeskeil Bescheid Beuren Damflos Geisfeld Grimburg Gusenburg Hermeskeil 1, 2 Hinzert-Pölert Naurath (Wald) Neuhütten Rascheid Reinsfeld Züsch 2. Kell am See Baldringen Greimerath Heddert Hentern Kell am See 1 Lampaden Mandern Paschel Schillingen Schömerich Vierherrenborn Waldweiler Zerf | 3. Konz Kanzem Konz 1, 2 Nittel Oberbillig Onsdorf Pellingen Tawern Temmels Wasserliesch Wawern Wellen Wiltingen 4. Ruwer Bonerath Farschweiler Gusterath Gutweiler Herl Hinzenburg Holzerath Kasel Korlingen Lorscheid Mertesdorf Morscheid Ollmuth Osburg Pluwig Riveris Schöndorf Sommerau Thomm Waldrach 1 | 5. Saarburg Ayl Fisch Freudenburg Irsch Kastel-Staadt Kirf Mannebach Merzkirchen Ockfen Palzem Saarburg 1, 2 Schoden Serrig Taben-Rodt Trassem Wincheringen | 6. Schweich an der Römischen Weinstraße Bekond Detzem Ensch Fell Föhren Kenn Klüsserath Köwerich Leiwen Longen Longuich Mehring Naurath (Eifel) Pölich Riol Schleich Schweich 1, 2 Thörnich Trittenheim 7. Trier-Land [seat: Trier] Aach Franzenheim Hockweiler Igel Kordel Langsur Newel Ralingen Trierweiler Welschbillig Zemmer Verbandsgemeinde n 1 seat of the Verbandsgemeinde; 2 town [ References ] [ External links ] [ Landkreis Trier-Saarburg ] Official website (German) [ 49.67 6.67 title dms ] Category:Districts of Rhineland-Palatinate de:Landkreis Trier-Saarburg eo:Distrikto Trier-Saarburg fr:Arrondissement de Trèves-Sarrebourg id:Trier-Saarburg it:Treviri-Saarburg lb:Landkrees Tréier-Saarburg nl:Trier-Saarburg pnb:ٹرائیر-ساربرگ pl:Powiat Trier-Saarburg pt:Trier-Saarburg ro:Trier-Saarburg (district) ru:Трир-Саарбург (район) stq:Loundkring Trier-Saarburg sr:Округ Трир-Сарбург sv:Landkreis Trier-Saarburg vi:Trier-Saarburg war:Trier-Saarburg zh:特里尔-萨尔堡县