[ Extensor carpi radialis longus musculus extensor carpi radialis longus 125 452 ECR-longus.png Superficial muscles of the forearm. Extensor carpi radialis longus visible in blue. Gray422.png Transverse section across the wrist and digits. (Ext. carp. rad. long. labeled at center left.) lateral supracondylar ridge 2nd metacarpal radial artery radial nerve extensor at the wrist joint, abducts the hand at the wrist Flexor carpi radialis muscle m_22 12548862 ] Extensor carpi radialis longus is one of the five main muscle s that control movements at the wrist. This muscle is quite long, starting on the lateral side of the humerus, and attaching to the base of the second metacarpal bone (metacarpal of the index finger ). [ Function ] As the name suggests, this muscle is an extensor at the wrist joint and travels along the radial side of the arm, so will also abduct (radial abduction) the hand at the wrist. { Platzer 2004, p 164 } That is, it manipulates the wrist so as to move the hand towards the thumb (i.e., abduction —away from the mid-position of the hand) and away from the palmar side (i.e., extension —increased angle between the palm and the front of the forearm). [ Origin, course, and insertion ] It originates from the lateral supracondylar ridge of the humerus, from the lateral intermuscular septum, and by a few fibers from the lateral epicondyle of the humerus. The fibres end at the upper third of the forearm in a flat tendon, which runs along the lateral border of the radius, beneath the Abductor pollicis longus and Extensor pollicis brevis; it then passes beneath the dorsal carpal ligament, where it lies in a groove on the back of the radius common to it and the Extensor carpi radialis brevis, immediately behind the styloid process. One of the three muscles of the radial forearm group, it initially runs along with brachioradialis, but becomes mostly tendon early on. Passing between brachioradialis and extensor carpi radialis brevis, this tendon continues into the second tendon compartment together with the latter muscle. It is inserted into the dorsal surface of the base of the second metacarpal bone, on its radial side. [ Innervation ] The extensor carpi radialis longus is a wrist extensor that is innervated by the radial nerve. Though the radial nerve receives contributions from vertebrae levels C5, C6, C7, C8 and T1, studies have shown that the neurons that innervate the extensor carpi radialis longus arise from cervical vertebrae levels C6 and C7. { Bradley Bowden, Illustrated Atlas of the Skeletal Muscles, 2005 } All other major extensor muscles in the superficial layer of the posterior compartment (the Extensor Digitorum, Extensor Carpi Radialis Brevis, Extensor Carpi Ulnaris, and the Extensor Digiti Minimi ) are innervated by the posterior interosseous branch of the radial nerve. [ Exercises ] The muscle, like all extensors of the forearm, can be strengthened by exercise that resist its extension. A wrist roller can be used and reverse wrist curls with dumbbell s can performed. [ Additional images ] [ 130 130 3 Image:Gray214.png Bones of left forearm. Posterior aspect. Image:Gray220.png Bones of the left hand. Dorsal surface. Image:Gray416.png Tendons of forefinger and vincula tendina. Image:Gray417_color.PNG Cross-section through the middle of the forearm. Image:Gray419.png Posterior surface of the forearm. Deep muscles. Image:Gray421.png Transverse section across distal ends of radius and ulna. Image:Gray424.png The mucous sheaths of the tendons on the back of the wrist. File:Forearm posterior view.jpg Extensor carpi radialis longus muscle ] [ Notes ] [ article August 2009 ] [ References ] [ Werner Platzer Color Atlas of Human Anatomy, Vol. 1: Locomotor System Thieme 3-13-533305-1 2004 5th ] [ External links ] [ -1912209407 ] Category:Muscles of the upper limb ar:عضلة كعبرية طويلة باسطة للرسغ de:Musculus extensor carpi radialis longus es:Músculo extensor radial largo del carpo fr:Muscle long extenseur radial du carpe gl:Músculo extensor radial longo do carpo hr:Dugi radijalni ispružač zapešća id:Otot extensor carpi radialis longus he:השריר פושט שורש היד החישורי הארוך hu:Hosszú orsócsonti csuklófeszítő izom ja:長橈側手根伸筋 pl:Mięsień prostownik promieniowy długi nadgarstka pt:Músculo extensor radial longo do carpo ru:Длинный лучевой разгибатель запястья sl:Dolga koželjnična iztezalka sv:Extensor carpi radialis longus th:กล้ามเนื้อเอกซ์เทนเซอร์ คาร์ไพ เรเดียลิส ลองกัส