[ article January 2008 ] [ перестройка perestroika restructuring, rebuilding ] Perestroika ( [ перестройка ] [ pʲɪrʲɪˈstrojkə ru-perestroika.ogg ] ) [ http://mars.wnec.edu/~grempel/courses/wc2/lectures/gorrev.html &apos; &amp; #39;Gorbachev and Perestroika&apos; &amp; #39;. Professor Gerhard Rempel, Department of History, Western New England College, 1996-02-02, accessed 2008-07-12 Mars.wnec.edu 2010-03-31 ] was a political movement within the Communist Party of the Soviet Union during the 1980s, widely associated with the Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev along with his other major policy reform he introduced known as glasnost, meaning &quot; openness &quot;. Its literal meaning is &quot; restructuring &quot;, referring to the restructuring of the Soviet political and economic system. Perestroika is often argued to be a cause of the dissolution of the Soviet Union, the revolutions of 1989 in Eastern Europe, and the end of the Cold War. [ http://www.thenation.com/doc/20091116/kvh_cohen &apos; &amp; #39;Gorbachev on 1989&apos; &amp; #39;. Katrina vanden Heuvel &amp; Stephen F. Cohen. 2009-10-28 Thenation.com 2001-09-11 2010-03-31 ] [ Summary ] Perestroika allowed more independent actions from the various ministries and introduced some market-like reforms. The intention of perestroika, however, was not to end the command economy but rather to make socialism work more efficiently to better meet the needs of Soviet consumers. { Mikhail Gorbachev, Perestroika (New York: Harper Collins, 1987), quoted in Mark Kishlansky, ed., Sources of the West: Readings in Western Civilization, 4th ed., vol. 2 (New York: Longman, 2001), p. 322. } The process of implementing perestroika arguably exacerbated already existing political, social and economic tensions within the Soviet Union and no doubt helped to further nationalism in the constituent republics. Perestroika and resistance to it are often cited as major catalysts leading to the breakup of the Soviet Union. Although perestroika did, in fact, cause undue social unrest, it also gave the Soviet Union a new direction of foreign policy that achieved greater political power than ever before. Gorbachev changed the meaning of freedom for the people of the USSR. Previously, freedom had meant recognition of the Marxist-Leninist Regime. Now, however, freedom meant escaping all constraints. He also ceased the persecution of religion under perestroika and allowed the publishing of previously banned books, such as 1984, Animal Farm, and Doctor Zhivago. Although Gorbachev&apos;s attempts at Perestroika ultimately failed, he drastically changed the perceptions of the outside world towards his country. { Brown, Archie. “The Gorbachev Era”, in The Cambridge History of Russia: The Twentieth Century, ed. Ronald Grigor Suny. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007, p. 336. } [ Political reforms ] After Mikhail Gorbachev took the office of General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union in March 1985, he began a series of political reforms that were resisted by many established members of the Communist Party. However, Gorbachev appealed over the heads of the party to the people and called for demokratizatsiya (democratisation). { Pages 19, } { Robert V. Daniels, The End of the Communist Revolution, Routledge (1993), trade paperback, 222 pages, ISBN 0-415-06159-4 } [ Check digit (4) does not correspond to calculated figure. ] For Gorbachev, demokratizatsiya originally meant the introduction of multi- candidate (but not multiparty ) elections for local Communist Party (CPSU) positions and Soviet s. In this way, he hoped to rejuvenate the party with progressive personnel who would carry out his institutional and policy reforms. The CPSU would retain sole custody of the ballot box. [ March 2009 ] In May 1987 the unauthorized landing of German amateur aviator Mathias Rust next to the Kremlin enabled Gorbachev to remove many hardline opponents of his reforms, including Defense Minister Marshal Sergei Sokolov, from their positions in the military, and to consolidate his authority. [ 10.1080/14682740701197631 Brown, Archie 2007 Perestroika and the End of the Cold War Cold War History 7 1 1–17 ] Gorbachev increasingly found himself caught between criticism by conservatives who wanted to stop reform and liberals who wanted to accelerate it. Meanwhile, despite his intention to maintain a one-party system, the elements of a multiparty system were already crystallizing. Despite some setbacks, he continued his policy of demokratizatsiya, and he enjoyed his worldwide perception as the reformer. In June 1988, at the CPSU&apos;s Nineteenth Party Conference, the first held since 1941, Gorbachev and his supporters launched radical reforms meant to reduce party control of the government apparatus. He again called for multi-candidate elections for regional and local legislatures and party first secretaries and insisted on the separation of the government apparatus from party bodies at the regional level, as well. He managed, in the face of an overwhelming majority of conservatives (i.e., higher authorities), to force through acceptance of his reform proposals. It would seem that the conference was a successful step in promoting party-directed change from above. At an unprecedented emergency Central Committee plenum called by Gorbachev in September 1988, three stalwart old-guard members left the Politburo or lost positions of power. Andrey Gromyko retired from the Politburo, Yegor Ligachev was relieved of the ideology portfolio within the Politburo&apos;s Secretariat, and Boris Pugo replaced Politburo member Mikhail Solomentsev as chairman of the powerful CPSU Party Control Committee. The Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union then elected Gorbachev chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet, giving Gorbachev the attributes of power that previously Leonid Brezhnev had. These changes meant that the Secretariat, until that time solely responsible for the development and implementation of state policies, had lost much of its power. Meaningful changes also occurred in governmental structures. In December 1988, the Supreme Soviet approved formation of a Congress of People&apos;s Deputies, which constitutional amendments had established as the Soviet Union&apos;s new legislative body. The Supreme Soviet then dissolved itself. The amendments called for a smaller working body of 542 members, also called the Supreme Soviet, to be elected from the 2,250-member Congress of People&apos;s Deputies. To ensure a communist majority in the new parliament, Gorbachev reserved one-third of the seats for the CPSU and other public organizations. The March 1989 election of the Congress of People&apos;s Deputies marked the first time that voters of the Soviet Union ever chose the membership of a national legislative body. The results of the election stunned the ruling elite. Throughout the country, voters crossed off [ March 2009 ] the ballot unopposed communist candidates, many of them prominent party officials, taking advantage of the nominal privilege of withholding approval of the listed candidates. However, the Congress of People&apos;s Deputies that emerged still contained 87 percent CPSU members because of the previous seat-packing (one-third reserved for Communists). Genuine reformists won only some 300 seats. In May the initial session of the Congress of People&apos;s Deputies electrified the country. For two weeks on live television, deputies from around the country railed against every scandal and shortcoming of the Soviet system that could be identified. Speakers spared neither Gorbachev, the KGB, nor the military. Nevertheless, a conservative majority maintained control of the congress. Gorbachev was elected without opposition to the chairmanship of the new Supreme Soviet; then the Congress of People&apos;s Deputies elected a large majority of old-style party apparatchik s to fill the membership of its new legislative body. Outspoken opposition leader Yeltsin obtained a seat in the Supreme Soviet only when another deputy relinquished his position. The first Congress of People&apos;s Deputies was the last moment of real control for Gorbachev over the political life of the Soviet Union. In the summer of 1989, the first opposition bloc in the Congress of People&apos;s Deputies formed under the name of the Interregional Group of Deputies. The members of this body included almost all of the liberal and Russian nationalist members of the opposition led by Boris Yeltsin. A primary issue for the opposition was the repeal of Article 6 of the constitution, which prescribed the supremacy of the CPSU over all the institutions in society. Faced with opposition pressure for the repeal of Article 6 and needing allies against hard-liners in the CPSU, Gorbachev obtained the repeal of Article 6 by the February 1990 Central Committee plenum. Later that month, before the Supreme Soviet, he proposed the creation of a new office of President of the Soviet Union, for himself to be elected by the Congress of People&apos;s Deputies rather than the popular elections. Accordingly, in March 1990 Gorbachev was elected for the third time in eighteen months to a position of Soviet head of state. Former first deputy chairman of the Supreme Soviet Anatoliy Luk&apos;yanov became chairman of the Supreme Soviet, but for the first time in the history of the USSR this position was stripped of powers of the head of state. The Supreme Soviet became similar to Western parliament s. Its debates were televised daily. By the time of the Twenty-Eighth Party Congress in July 1990, the CPSU was regarded by liberals and nationalists of the constituent republics as anachronistic and unable to lead the country. The CPSU branches in many of the fifteen Soviet republics began to split into large pro-sovereignty and pro-union factions, further weakening central party control. In a series of humiliations, the CPSU had been separated from the government and stripped of its leading role in society and its function in overseeing the national economy. However, the majority of its apparatchiks were successful in obtaining leading positions in the newly formed democratic institutions. For seventy years, the CPSU had been the cohesive force that kept the union together; without the authority of the party in the Soviet center, the nationalities of the constituent republics pulled harder than ever to break away from the union. [ Economic reforms ] In May 1985, Gorbachev gave a speech in Leningrad which he admitted the slowing down of the economic development and inadequate living standards. This was the first time in Soviet history that a Soviet leader had done so. The program was furthered at the 27th Congress of the Communist Party in Gorbachev&apos;s report to the congress, in which he spoke about &quot; perestroika &quot;, &quot; uskoreniye &quot;, &quot; human factor &quot;, &quot; glasnost &quot;, and &quot; expansion of the khozraschyot &quot; (commercialization). During the initial period (1985–87) of Mikhail Gorbachev&apos;s time in power, he talked about modifying central planning, but did not make any truly fundamental changes ( uskoreniye, acceleration). Gorbachev and his team of economic advisers then introduced more fundamental reforms, which became known as perestroika (economic restructuring). At the June 1987 plenary session of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU), Gorbachev presented his &quot; basic theses, &quot; which laid the political foundation of economic reform for the remainder of the existence of the Soviet Union. In July 1987, the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union passed the Law on State Enterprise. The law stipulated that state enterprises were free to determine output levels based on demand from consumers and other enterprises. Enterprises had to fulfill state orders, but they could dispose of the remaining output as they saw fit. However, at the same time the state still held control over the means of production for these enterprises, thus limiting their ability to enact full-cost accountability. Enterprises bought input from suppliers at negotiated contract prices. Under the law, enterprises became self-financing; that is, they had to cover expenses (wages, taxes, supplies, and debt service) through revenues. No longer was the government to rescue unprofitable enterprises that could face bankruptcy. Finally, the law shifted control over the enterprise operations from ministries to elected workers&apos; collectives. Gosplan &apos;s ( [ Государственный комитет по планированию ], State Committee for Planning) responsibilities were to supply general guidelines and national investment priorities, not to formulate detailed production plans. The Law on Cooperatives, enacted in May 1988, { Brooks, Karen M. (1988). The Law on Cooperatives, Retail Food Prices, and the Farm Financial Crisis in the U.S.S.R. ( } { PDF ). University of Minnesota. Department of Agricultural and Applied Economics. Retrieved on 14 August 2009. } was perhaps the most radical of the economic reforms during the early part of the Gorbachev era. For the first time since Vladimir Lenin &apos;s New Economic Policy, the law permitted private ownership of businesses in the services, manufacturing, and foreign-trade sectors. The law initially imposed high taxes and employment restrictions, but it later revised these to avoid discouraging private-sector activity. Under this provision, cooperative restaurants, shops, and manufacturers became part of the Soviet scene. &apos;&apos;Perestroika&apos;&apos; postage stamp, 1988 Gorbachev brought perestroika to the Soviet Union&apos;s foreign economic sector with measures that Soviet economists considered bold at that time. His program virtually eliminated the monopoly that the Ministry of Foreign Trade had once held on most trade operations. It permitted the ministries of the various industrial and agricultural branches to conduct foreign trade in sectors under their responsibility rather than having to operate indirectly through the bureaucracy of trade ministry organizations. In addition, regional and local organizations and individual state enterprises were permitted to conduct foreign trade. This change was an attempt to redress a major imperfection in the Soviet foreign trade regime: the lack of contact between Soviet end users and suppliers and their foreign partners. The most significant of Gorbachev&apos;s reforms in the foreign economic sector allowed foreigners to invest in the Soviet Union in the form of joint venture s with Soviet ministries, state enterprises, and cooperatives. The original version of the Soviet Joint Venture Law, which went into effect in June 1987, limited foreign shares of a Soviet venture to 49 percent and required that Soviet citizens occupy the positions of chairman and general manager. After potential Western partners complained, the government revised the regulations to allow majority foreign ownership and control. Under the terms of the Joint Venture Law, the Soviet partner supplied labor, infrastructure, and a potentially large domestic market. The foreign partner supplied capital, technology, entrepreneurial expertise, and, in many cases, products and services of world competitive quality. Gorbachev&apos;s economic changes did not do much to restart the country&apos;s sluggish economy in the late 1980s. The reforms decentralized things to some extent, although price controls remained, as did the ruble&apos;s inconvertibility and most government controls over the means of production. By 1990 the government had virtually lost control over economic conditions. Government spending increased sharply as an increasing number of unprofitable enterprises required state support and consumer price subsidies continued. Tax revenues declined because republic and local governments withheld tax revenues from the central government under the growing spirit of regional autonomy. The elimination of central control over production decisions, especially in the consumer goods sector, led to the breakdown in traditional supply-demand relationships without contributing to the formation of new ones. Thus, instead of streamlining the system, Gorbachev&apos;s decentralization caused new production bottlenecks. [ Comparison with China ] Perestroika and Deng Xiaoping &apos;s economic reforms have similar origins but very different effects on their respective countries&apos; economies. Both efforts occurred in large communist countries attempting to modernize their economies, but while China&apos;s GDP has grown consistently since the late 1980s (albeit from a much lower level), national GDP in the USSR and in many of its successor states fell precipitously throughout the 1990s. [ http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2006/01/data/dbcselm.cfm?G%3D2001 IMF World Economic Outlook Database April 2006 International Monetary Fund 2003-04-29 2010-03-31 ] [ January 2008 ] Gorbachev&apos;s reforms were largely a top-down attempt at reform, and maintained many of the macroeconomic aspects of the command economy (including price controls, inconvertibility of the ruble, exclusion of private property ownership, and the government monopoly over most means of production). Reform was largely focused on industry and on cooperatives, and a limited role was given to the development of foreign investment and international trade. Factory managers were expected to meet state demands for goods, but to find their own funding. Perestroika reforms went far enough to create new bottlenecks in the Soviet economy, but arguably did not go far enough to effectively streamline it. Chinese economic reform was, by contrast, a bottom-up attempt at reform, focusing on light industry and agriculture (namely allowing peasants to sell produce grown on private holdings at market prices). Economic reforms were fostered through the development of &quot; Special Economic Zone s &quot;, designed for export and to attract foreign investment, municipally managed Township and Village Enterprises and a &quot; dual pricing &quot; system leading to the steady phasing out of state-dictated prices. Greater latitude was given to managers of state-owned factories, while capital was made available to them through a reformed banking system and through fiscal policies (in contrast to the fiscal anarchy and fall in revenue experienced by the Soviet government during perestroika). Another fundamental difference is that where perestroika was accompanied by greater political freedoms under Gorbachev&apos;s glasnost policies, Chinese economic reform has been accompanied by continued authoritarian rule and a suppression of political dissidents, most notably at Tiananmen Square. [ See also ] History of the Soviet Union (1982–1991) Uskoreniye Glasnost Democratisation in the Soviet Union 500 Days Predictions of Soviet collapse Revolutions of 1989 Wind of Change (song) [ References ] [ Further reading ] [ Abalkin Leonid Ivanovich Kursom uskoreniya The strategy of acceleration 1986 Politizdat Moscow ] [ Cohen Stephen F. Katrina Vanden Heuvel Voices of Glasnost: Interviews With Gorbachev&apos;s Reformers 1989 repr. 1990 W. W. Norton &amp; Company 0-393-30735-2 ] [ Gorbachev Mikhail Perestroika: New Thinking for Our Country and the World 1988 Harper &amp; Row 0-06-091528-5 ] [ Jha Prem Shankar The Perilous Road to the Market: The Political Economy of Reform in Russia, India and China 2003 Pluto Press 0-7453-1851-7 ] [ External links ] [ Perestroika ] [ perestroika ] Yakovlev on perestroika The Economic Collapse of the Soviet Union Perestroika - TM in Ukraine [ Brezhnev stagnation ] [ History of Russia History of the Soviet Union 10 March 1985 – 25 December 1991 ] [ Dissolution of the USSR In Russia : Yeltsinism ] Category:1980s economic history Category:Soviet phraseology Category:Economy of the Soviet Union Category:Soviet internal politics Category:Russian loanwords Category:Dissolution of the Soviet Union Category:Anti-communism Category:1980s in the Soviet Union Category:1987 in politics ar:بيريسترويكا be:Перабудова bg:Перестройка ca:Perestroika cs:Perestrojka da:Perestrojka de:Perestroika et:Perestroika el:Περεστρόικα es:Perestroika eo:Perestrojko eu:Perestroika fa:پروسترویکا fr:Perestroïka gl:Perestroika ko:페레스트로이카 hy:Վերակառուցում (ԽՍՀՄ) hr:Perestrojka io:Perestroika id:Perestroika it:Perestrojka he:פרסטרויקה ka:პერესტროიკა lv:Perestroika lb:Perestroika lt:Perestroika hu:Peresztrojka ms:Prestroika nl:Perestrojka ja:ペレストロイカ no:Perestrojka nn:Perestrojka pl:Pieriestrojka pt:Perestroika ro:Perestroika ru:Перестройка simple:Perestroika sk:Perestrojka sr:Перестројка sh:Perestrojka fi:Perestroika sv:Perestrojka tl:Perestrojka ta:பெரஸ்ட்ரோயிகா tr:Perestroyka uk:Перебудова vi:Perestroika zh:经济改革