[ a group of British comedians other uses Comic strip (disambiguation) ] [ January 2011 ] [ The Comic Strip British Comedy 1982– The Comic Strip Presents... (1982–2011) Adrian Edmondson Dawn French Rik Mayall Nigel Planer Peter Richardson Jennifer Saunders Alexei Sayle ] The Comic Strip is a group of British comedians, who came to prominence in the 1980s. They are known for their television series The Comic Strip Presents... which was labelled as an example of alternative comedy. The core members are Adrian Edmondson, Dawn French, Rik Mayall, Nigel Planer, Peter Richardson, Jennifer Saunders and Alexei Sayle with frequent appearances by Keith Allen, Robbie Coltrane and others. [ Early history ] Two double acts, Adrian Edmondson and Rik Mayall under the name &quot; 20th Century Coyote &quot; and Nigel Planer and Peter Richardson ( &quot; The Outer Limits &quot; ), started performing at the newly opened Comedy Store in London in mid 1980, alongside compere Alexei Sayle who had been resident there since the Comedy Store opened in 1979. Concurrently Richardson searched for a venue to mount a play he had produced with Michael White. He planned to run The Comic Strip late at night after the play&apos;s performances. He sourced the Raymond Revue Bar in Soho, but realising it was unsuitable for a theatrical production and running out of enthusiasm for the play he decided to continue with the idea of a cabaret night. He persuaded the double acts and Sayle to move from the Comedy Store along with Arnold Brown, an older standup comic who did not fit so obviously into the alternative comedy scene. Sayle again resumed his compere duties and decided running order, with Richardson having behind the scenes control. Richardson put out an advert for female performers which was answered by French and Saunders. [ Wilmut Roger Didn&apos;t You Kill My Mother In Law?- the story of alternative comedy in Brtiain from the Comedy Store to Saturday Night Live 1989 Methuen UK 0-413-17390-9 57–58 http://books.google.com/books/about/Didn_t_you_kill_my_mother_in_law.html?id%3DmrQqAAAAMAAJ ] Richardson prompted members to sign a contract to signify their attachment to the group. The Comic Strip opened in October 1980 and ran until 1981, when the troupe went on a national tour and then a tour of Australia. While the performers gained more exposure, actors such as Jack Nicholson and Robin Williams turned up to watch. Richardson approached producer Mike Bolland, the newly appointed Channel Four youth and entertainment commissioning editor to propose a series of Comic Strip films for the channel. Bolland agreed to his proposal, his first commission for the station and Jeremy Isaacs quickly approved the budget. [ Jones Ian Blah Blah Blah Ian Jones on The Comic Strip Presents… http://www.offthetelly.co.uk/?page_id%3D425 Off the Telly Off the Telly 6 December 2011 ] Richardson negotiated a deal with the channel for six self-contained half-hour film s, using the group as actors rather than standup performers. Almost simultaneously, the BBC signed Edmondson, Mayall, Planer and Sayle to star in The Young Ones, a sitcom in the same anarchic style as the Comic Strip. Richardson was initially to have been involved (in the role of Mike, ultimately played by Christopher Ryan ), but was not due to differences between him and the show&apos;s producer, Paul Jackson. [ Television ] [ The Comic Strip Presents... ] [ The Comic Strip Presents... Short film 4:3 16:9 30 minutes Peter Richardson Peter Richardson Pete Richens United Kingdom Adrian Edmondson Dawn French Rik Mayall Nigel Planer Peter Richardson Jennifer Saunders Channel 4 BBC 2 2 November 1982 present 5 40 List of The Comic Strip Presents... episodes Peter Richardson no ] The Comic Strip Presents... debuted on 2 November 1982, the opening night of Channel 4. Each episode was prefixed by an animated lead-in consisting of the words &quot; The Comic Strip Presents &quot; accompanied by a soundtrack consisting of a drum machine and a Farfisa organ, together with a bomb labelled &quot; Have a nice day &quot;, falling towards a map. In the early episodes the map was of a section of north Dorset and southern Wiltshire, centred on the town of Shaftesbury. The first episode was &quot; Five Go Mad in Dorset &quot;, a parody of The Famous Five. It was written by Peter Richardson and Pete Richens, who wrote most of the early episodes. &quot; Five Go Mad... &quot; drew anger from some viewers for the way it mercilessly satirised a children&apos;s classic, although the Enid Blyton estate had given permission for the broadcast. A meeting was called to discuss the group&apos;s future with Channel 4, after complaints from viewers. The final episode of the first series was to have been a spoof chat show called &quot; Back to Normal with Eddie Monsoon &quot; (referred to as &quot; An Evening with Eddie Monsoon &quot; by some sources). It was never produced, as it was considered too vulgar even for the &quot; alternative &quot; Channel 4, not to mention possibly libellous. The script – which, uniquely for the Comic Strip, was written as a collaboration by the entire cast – was later published, along with the rest of the series, in book form. A second series of seven episodes followed in 1983-84, including &quot; Five Go Mad On Mescalin &quot;, a sequel to the first episode, and the newly-written &quot; Eddie Monsoon – A Life? &quot;, a spoof documentary on the life and times of the title character, an obscene, drunken television host (played by Adrian Edmondson). Michael White, the theatre impresario and Rocky Horror Show producer who had been brought in by Richardson as executive producer on the series, appeared in this episode as Monsoon&apos;s producer, who had been responsible for axing Eddie&apos;s television comeback show – called Back to Normal with Eddie Monsoon. The reasons given for the cancellation (e.g. &quot; the things you said about Burt Reynolds &quot; ) are presumably the same problems that led to the real &quot; Back to Normal... &quot; being dropped by Channel 4. (The name Eddie Monsoon – a corruption of &quot; Edmondson &quot; – was later used by Jennifer Saunders, Adrian Edmondson&apos;s wife, for her character in Absolutely Fabulous.) Two one-off episodes were aired on Channel 4 over Christmas 1985, reflecting the tight schedules of the group. &apos;Consuela&apos; was a French and Saunders-led pastiche of the Alfred Hitchcock film &apos;Rebecca&apos;, with French&apos;s eponymous crazed housekeeper taking centre stage. The second episode, &apos;Private Enterprise&apos;, was the tale of a music business rip off, where Peter Richardson steals a studio recording session tape and passes the results off as his own work. The group made two feature films - The Supergrass (1985) and Eat the Rich (1987) - as well as three one-off Comic Strip Presents... episodes which were the next to be screened on Channel 4. The first of these, &quot; The Bullshitters &quot;, was a parody of television spy and detective shows such as The Professionals. It was not broadcast under the Comic Strip name, partly because of the original group only Richardson appears (he is the only performer to appear in every single episode), and partly because co-star and co-writer Keith Allen did not want to be so closely associated with the group. The third series was broadcast in 1988, and some episodes had longer running times, mostly around 50 minutes. Five of the six episodes (all except &quot; Funseekers &quot; ) were given a limited theatrical release. They included &quot; The Strike &quot;, which won the Golden Rose of Montreux; &quot; More Bad News &quot;, a sequel to &quot; Bad News Tour &quot; showing the band reforming after five years to play at Castle Donington; and &quot; Mr. Jolly Lives Next Door &quot;, written by Mayall and Edmondson in the violent style of their sitcoms Filthy Rich and Catflap and Bottom, which featured Peter Cook as a psychotic contract killer (the eponymous Mr. Jolly) and Nicholas Parsons. Peter Richardson and Pete Richens only contributed one episode to the third series, allowing cast members such as Planer and Sayle to get their ideas on screen. By now the show had proved a hit, and several notable stars appeared in later productions, including Leslie Phillips, Miranda Richardson, Lionel Jeffries, Nicholas Parsons, Peter Capaldi, Kate Bush, Richard Vernon, Ruby Wax, Graham Crowden, Paul McCartney, Ozzy Osbourne, Lemmy, Elvis Costello, and Benjamin Zephaniah (as a Rastafarian police van driver) and several musical acts, particularly from the Bad News series which was also aided by Queen guitarist Brian May, such as Def Leppard and Marillion. [ BBC and after ] In 1990, the series transferred to BBC2. By now, all the regulars (with the exception of Peter Richardson) had become more famous for their own shows, and more recurring performers such as Gary Beadle, Phil Cornwell, Steve O&apos;Donnell, Mark Caven, Sara Stockbridge and Doon Mackichan were brought in. Rik Mayall was contracted to ITV &apos;s The New Statesman, and was only able to appear in two of the BBC productions ( &quot; GLC &quot;, and the Comic Relief special &quot; Red Nose of Courage &quot; ). Richardson and Richens took over the bulk of the writing again, and Richardson also took over as director, having previously directed the two feature films, as well as The Strike. The six-part 1990 series was followed by three individual specials in 1992, and a final six episodes in 1993. [ Return to Channel 4 ] In 1998 the original team reunited and returned to Channel 4 for a one-off special, Four Men In A Car. This was followed in 2000 by a sequel, Four Men In A Plane. After another long hiatus, another 60-minute one-off, &quot; Sex Actually &quot;, was made in 2005. It starred Sheridan Smith ( Two Pints of Lager and a Packet of Crisps ) and Tamer Hassan ( Layer Cake ) alongside several of the regular cast members. Four Men in a Car was notable for being the first broadcast on either television or radio, to involve Rik Mayall since his quad bike accident. Permission was thus given by Mayall&apos;s family to show the special. Peter Richardson, who has built his career as a writer-director with the TV series Stella Street and films such as Churchill: The Hollywood Years, has not ruled out the possibility of a whole new series of The Comic Strip Presents... featuring younger cast members. In June 2011, a casting call went out for a new hour-long episode, starring most of the original team. { http://www.starnow.co.uk/listings/ListingDetail.aspx?l_id=248734 } This was followed by an announcement that the Comic Strip was to produce a one-off special entitled The Hunt for Tony Blair, starring Stephen Mangan as Blair and Robbie Coltrane as Inspector Hutton. The one-off show included Jennifer Saunders as Margaret Thatcher as well as Harry Enfield, Rik Mayall and a host of others. [ Guest Alex Comic Strip returns in The Hunt for Tony Blair http://tvpixie.com/tv-news/2011/06/14/comic-strip-returns-hunt-tony-blair TV Pixie 14 June 2011 ] The next Comic Strip will be a sequel to &quot; Five Go Mad In Dorset &quot;. &quot; Five Go To Rehab &quot;, featuring the entire original cast (Ade Edmonson, Dawn French, Jennifer Saunders, Peter Richardson) is set to film in the first weeks of July 2012, in and around Totnes. Richardson is writing and directing the film. The film showcases the characters thirty years on trying to recapture their youth. The film will be part of Channel 4&apos;s 30th anniversary schedule in November 2012. { http://www.totnesfm.co.uk/#/original-comic-strip-cast-back/4562087073 } [ Video and DVD releases ] In 1986 Virgin Video released various episodes of the programme dating between 1982-4, which have now become rare. The 1988 series was released on video the same year by Palace Video, each episode having its own video. The only existing episode of the BBC series on video is &quot; GLC &quot;, which Polygram Video released with &quot; The Strike &quot; in 1994. When the Virgin and Palace Video videos went out of print in 1990, the rights were transferred to Polygram Video. After three years all the Channel 4 episodes of The Comic Strip were released on video. Eat the Rich (1987) has not been released on DVD in the UK. Eat the Rich is available as a Region 1 (American) DVD and a Region 2 (German) DVD. A nine-disc Region 2 DVD set, The Comic Strip Presents: The Complete Collection was released in July 2005 (and re-released in August 2007). This included all the Channel 4 and BBC episodes (finally canonising The Bullshitters as a Comic Strip episode) plus The Supergrass across eight discs, but not Eat the Rich (due to rights issues), and was released too early to include...Sex Actually. The ninth disc includes a retrospective documentary from 2005, Julien Temple &apos;s 1981 film The Comic Strip (which retroactively lays a strong claim to being the actual first &apos;episode&apos;), and the two Comic Strip episodes of the 1998 documentary series First On Four. Across the new and archive documentaries are featured interviews with every single key Comic Strip member. The DVD set contains new, slightly shorter, re-edited versions of &apos;South Atlantic Raiders&apos; (both parts) and &apos;Four Men In A Car&apos;, in addition to featuring the 90-minute re-edit of &apos;The Supergrass&apos; (the original VHS release having been almost 20 minutes longer). The DVD re-editing was a deliberate creative decision, with the work undertaken by Peter Richardson himself alongside editor Geoff Hogg, though the decision was a controversial one with fans of the series. As of May 1, 2012, the entire &quot; Comic Strip Presents &quot; series is available on Netflix &apos;s streaming service in the U.S. The show is split into eight seasons. [ List of Comic Strip episodes ] [ http://www.artsfest.org.uk/programme/ian-emes-presents-15/ Ian Emes Presents…(15) 2011 Artsfest programme Birmingham City Council 7 September 2011 ] Episode Tx Date Writers Directors Featuring Series 1 (1982–83) 01 Five Go Mad in Dorset 2 November 1982 Richardson, Richens Bob Spiers Coltrane, Edmondson, French, Peacock, Richardson, Saunders + Ronald Allen 02 War 3 January 1983 Richardson, Richens Bob Spiers Coltrane, Edmondson, French, Mayall, Peacock, Planer, Richardson, Saunders 03 The Beat Generation 17 January 1983 Richardson, Richens Bob Spiers Allen, Coltrane, Edmondson, French, Mayall, Peacock, Planer, Richardson, Saunders 04 Bad News Tour 24 January 1983 Edmondson Sandy Johnson Edmondson, French, Mayall, Planer, Richardson, Saunders 05 Summer School 31 January 1983 French Sandy Johnson Coltrane, Edmondson, French, Mayall, Planer, Richardson, Saunders Series 2 (1983–84) 06 Five Go Mad on Mescalin 2 November 1983 Richardson, Richens Bob Spiers Coltrane, Edmondson, French, Peacock, Richardson, Saunders + Ronald Allen 07 Dirty Movie 7 January 1984 Edmondson, Mayall Sandy Johnson Coltrane, Edmondson, French, Mayall, Planer, Richardson, Saunders 08 Susie 14 January 1984 Richardson, Richens Bob Spiers Coltrane, Edmondson, French, Pellay (aka Pillay), Planer, Richardson, Saunders 09 A Fistful of Travellers&apos; Cheques 21 January 1984 Mayall, Richardson, Richens Bob Spiers Allen, Edmondson, French, Mayall, Peacock, Planer, Richardson, Saunders 10 Gino: Full Story and Pics 28 January 1984 Richardson, Richens Bob Spiers Allen, Coltrane, Edmondson, French, Mayall, Peacock, Pellay (aka Pillay), Richardson, Saunders + Arnold Brown 11 Eddie Monsoon – A Life? 4 February 1984 Edmondson Sandy Johnson Edmondson, French, Richardson, Saunders 12 Slags 11 February 1984 Saunders Sandy Johnson Edmondson, French, Planer, Richardson, Saunders Special (1984) 13 The Bullshitters: Roll Out The Gunbarrel 3 November 1984 Richardson, Allen Stephen Frears Allen, Coltrane, Pellay (aka Pillay), Richardson + Kevin Allen Feature Film (1985) The Supergrass Richardson, Richens Peter Richardson Allen, Coltrane, Edmondson, French, Peacock, Pellay (aka Pillay), Planer, Richardson, Saunders, Sayle Specials (1986) 14 Consuela, or The New Mrs Saunders 1 January 1986 French, Saunders Stephen Frears Edmondson, French, Mayall, Richardson, Saunders 15 Private Enterprise 2 January 1986 Edmondson Adrian Edmondson Edmondson, French, Mayall, Planer, Richardson, Saunders Feature Film (1987) Eat the Rich Richardson, Richens Peter Richardson Coltrane, Edmondson, French, Mayall, Pellay (aka Pillay), Planer, Richardson, Saunders Series 3 (1988) 16 The Strike 20 February 1988 Richardson, Richens Peter Richardson Allen, Coltrane, Edmondson, French, Mayall, Peacock, Planer, Richardson, Saunders, Sayle + Kevin Allen, Ronald Allen 17 More Bad News 27 February 1988 Edmondson Adrian Edmondson Edmondson, French, Mayall, Planer, Richardson, Saunders 18 Mr Jolly Lives Next Door 5 March 1988 Edmondson, Mayall, Rowland Rivron Stephen Frears Edmondson, French, Mayall, Richardson, Saunders + Peter Cook 19 The Yob 12 March 1988 Allen, Peacock Ian Emes Allen, Edmondson, Richardson 20 Didn&apos;t You Kill My Brother? 19 March 1988 Sayle, David Stafford, Pauline Melville Bob Spiers Richardson, Sayle + Kevin Allen 21 Funseekers 26 March 1988 Planer, Doug Lucie Baz Taylor Allen, Planer, Richardson + Kevin Allen, Kathy Burke Series 4 (1990) 22 South Atlantic Raiders 1 February 1990 Richardson, Richens Peter Richardson Coltrane, Edmondson, French, Planer, Richardson, Saunders + Kathy Burke, Lenny Henry 23 &apos;&apos; 8 February 1990 Richardson, Richens Peter Richardson Coltrane, Edmondson, French, Planer, Richardson, Saunders + Kevin Allen, Ronald Allen, Kathy Burke 24 GLC: The Carnage Continues... 15 February 1990 Richardson, Richens Peter Richardson Allen, Coltrane, Edmondson, French, Mayall, Planer, Richardson, Saunders + Kevin Allen, Gary Beadle 25 Oxford 22 February 1990 Richardson, Richens Peter Richardson Edmondson, French, Planer, Richardson, Saunders + Ronald Allen, Lenny Henry 26 Spaghetti Hoops 1 March 1990 Richardson, Richens Peter Richardson Allen, French, Planer, Richardson, Saunders, Sayle + Tim McInnerny 27 Les Dogs 8 March 1990 Richardson, Richens Peter Richardson Allen, Edmondson, Peacock, Richardson, Sayle + Kevin Allen, Gary Beadle, Kate Bush, Tim McInnerny, Miranda Richardson Specials (1992) 28 Red Nose of Courage 9 April 1992 Richardson, Richens Peter Richardson Allen, Coltrane, Edmondson, French, Mayall, Planer, Richardson, Saunders, Sayle + Phil Cornwell, Mark Caven, and Doon Mackichan 29 The Crying Game 5 May 1992 Richardson, Allen Peter Richardson, Keith Allen Allen, Planer, Richardson + Gary Beadle, Phil Cornwell, Doon Mackichan and Mark Caven. 30 Wild Turkey 24 December 1992 Richardson, Richens Peter Richardson Richardson, Saunders + Gary Beadle, Phil Cornwell, Ruby Wax Series 5 (1993) 31 Detectives on the Edge of a Nervous Breakdown 22 April 1993 Richardson, Allen Peter Richardson, Keith Allen Allen, Richardson + Kevin Allen, Gary Beadle, Jim Broadbent, Phil Cornwell, Doon Mackichan and Mark Caven. 32 Space Virgins from Planet Sex 29 April 1993 Richardson, Richens Peter Richardson, Keith Allen Allen, Coltrane, Edmondson, French, Richardson, Saunders + Kevin Allen, Gary Beadle, Phil Cornwell, Doon Mackichan, Mark Caven, Miranda Richardson 33 Queen of the Wild Frontier 6 May 1993 Richardson, Richens Peter Richardson Richardson, Sayle + Gary Beadle 34 Gregory: Diary of a Nutcase 13 May 1993 Richardson, Richens Peter Richardson Allen, Edmondson, Planer, Richardson, Mark Caven, Phil Cornwell, Doon Mackichan 35 Demonella 20 May 1993 Paul Bartel, Barry Dennen Paul Bartel Allen, Coltrane, Edmondson, Planer, Richardson, Saunders + Miranda Richardson 36 Jealousy 27 May 1993 Coltrane, Morag Fullarton Robbie Coltrane Coltrane, Planer, Richardson, Saunders, Peter Capaldi, Kevin Allen, Gary Beadle, Kathy Burke, Miranda Richardson Special (1998) 37 Four Men in a Car 12 April 1998 Richardson, Richens Peter Richardson Edmondson, French, Mayall, Planer, Richardson, Saunders Special (2000) 38 Four Men in a Plane 4 January 2000 Richardson, Richens Peter Richardson Edmondson, Mayall, Planer, Richardson Special (2005) 39 …Sex Actually 28 December 2005 Richardson, Richens Peter Richardson Mayall, Planer, Richardson + Phil Cornwell, Doon Mackichan, Sheridan Smith Special (2011) 40 The Hunt for Tony Blair 14 October 2011 Richardson, Richens Peter Richardson Coltrane, Mayall, Planer, Richardson, Saunders + Stephen Mangan, Harry Enfield [ References ] [ External links ] [ 0083402 ] Peter Richardson TV BBC Comedy Guide - The Comic Strip Presents... British Film Institute Screen Online An unofficial Comic Strip Presents Website Article on the Comic Strip club with photos [ Comic Strip ] Category:British television comedy Category:Channel 4 television programmes Category:BBC television comedy Category:Working Title Films films Category:Television series by Working Title Television Category:1980s British television series Category:1990s British television series Category:2000s British television series Category:2010s British television series Category:1982 in British television Category:1982 television series debuts nl:The Comic Strip