[ Mediterranean Gull LC IUCN3.1 Larus melanocephalus aka Mediterranean Gull rare guest in Sweden2.jpg Animal ia Chordata Aves Charadriiformes Laridae Ichthyaetus I. melanocephalus Ichthyaetus melanocephalus ( Temminck, 1820, coast of Adriatic Sea ) Larus melanocephalus ] The Mediterranean Gull, Ichthyaetus melanocephalus, is a small gull which breeds almost entirely in the Western Palearctic, mainly in the south east, especially around the Black Sea, and in central Turkey. There are colonies elsewhere in southern Europe, and this species has undergone a dramatic range expansion in recent decades. Birders often abbreviate its name to &quot; Med Gull &quot;. As is the case with many gulls, it has traditionally been placed in the genus Larus. [ Description ] The Mediterranean Gull is slightly larger and bulkier than the Black-headed Gull with a heavier bill and longer, darker legs. The breeding plumage adult is a distinctive white gull, with a very pale grey mantle and wings with white primary feathers, with a black hood contrasting with distinct white eye crescents. The blunt tipped, parallel sided, dark red bill has a black subterminal band. The non breeding adult is similar but the hood is reduced to an extensive dusky &quot; bandit &quot; mask through the eye. This bird takes two years to reach maturity. First year birds have a black terminal tail band and more black areas in the upperwings, but have pale underwings. [ Distribution ] Formerly restricted to the Black Sea and the eastern Mediterranean this species has now expanded over most of Europe as far as the Great Britain and Ireland, with 37 sites: 543–592 pairs in the United Kingdom in 2008. { http://www.rbbp.org.uk/downloads/rbbp-report-2008.pdf } In Ireland breeding has been recorded in at least four counties. Breeeding has also occurred in Belgium, Netherlands, Denmark, Sweden, Estonia, Swittzerland, Czech Republic, Hungary and the Balkans. In winter, this bird migrates to Mediterranean and Atlantic coasts. [ Ecology ] This gull breeds in colonies in large reedbeds or marshes, or on islands in lakes; where its population is small, it nests in Black-headed Gull colonies. Like most gulls, it is highly gregarious in winter, both when feeding or in evening roosts. It is not a pelagic species, and is rarely seen at sea far from coasts. The Mediterranean Gull&apos;s feeding habits are much an opportunistic omnivore, eating fish, worms, scraps, insects, offal and carrion. This is a noisy species, especially at colonies, with a nasal &quot; yeah &quot; call. [ Conservation ] The Mediterranean Gull is one of the species to which the Agreement on the Conservation of African-Eurasian Migratory Waterbirds ( AEWA ) applies. Southend Pier, UK [ References ] [ Larus melanocephalus ] [ Larus melanocephalus ] [ BirdLife International 2004 49241 Larus melanocephalus 6 May 2006 ] Database entry includes justification for why this species is of least concern Pons J.M., Hassanin, A., and Crochet P.A.(2005). Phylogenetic relationships within the Laridae (Charadriiformes: Aves) inferred from mitochondrial markers. Molecular phylogenetics and evolution 37(3):686-699 Beaman, M. &amp; Madge, S (1998) The Handbook of Bird Identification, Christopher Helm Category:Larus Gull, Mediterranean az:Ichthyaetus melanocephalus bg:Малка черноглава чайка br:Gouelanig penn du ca:Gavina capnegra cs:Racek černohlavý da:Sorthovedet måge de:Schwarzkopfmöwe et:Karbuskajakas es:Larus melanocephalus eo:Nigrakapa mevo eu:Antxeta burubeltz fo:Høvuðsvartur mási fr:Mouette mélanocéphale it:Ichthyaetus melanocephalus lt:Juodagalvis kiras hu:Szerecsensirály mn:Газар дундын тэнгисийн цахлай nl:Zwartkopmeeuw ja:ニシズグロカモメ no:Svartehavsmåke pms:Larus melanocephalus pl:Mewa czarnogłowa pt:Gaivota-de-cabeça-preta ru:Черноголовая чайка fi:Mustanmerenlokki sv:Svarthuvad mås tr:Akdeniz martısı