[ May 2012 ] Emblem of the Lapuan liike The Lapua Movement ( [ Lapuan liike ] ), was a Finnish radical nationalist and anti-communist political movement founded in and named after the town of Lapua. After radicalisation it turned towards far-right politics and was banned after a failed coup-d&apos;état in 1932. Anti-communist activities of the movement continued in the parlamentarian Patriotic People&apos;s Movement. [ Background ] Lapuan liike started in 1929 and was initially dominated by anti-communist nationalist s, emphasizing the legacy of the nationalist activism, the White Guards and the Civil War in Finland. The movement saw itself as the badly needed restorator of what was won in the Civil War, supporting Lutheranism, nationalism, and anti-communism. Many politicians, and also high military officers, were initially sympathetic with the Lapua Movement, as anti-communism was the norm in the educated classes after the Civil War. However, excessive use of violence made the movement less popular within a few months. In the Civil War Ostrobothnia was one of the most important strongholds and bases of the White army, and anti-Communist sentiments remained extremely strong in Ostrobothnia. Late in November 1929 the Young Communist League of Finland arranged agitation, meetings and protests in Ostrobothnian Lapua. More specifically, they mocked God, the Lutheran Church, the bourgeois fatherland, the Finnish army and General Mannerheim { (Niinistö, Jussi, Suomalaisia vapaustaistelijoita / Finnish Freedom Fighters, NIMOX KY/Ltd., 2003, pages 17-20; Siltala, Juha, Lapuan liike ja kyyditykset, Otava, 1985, pages 51-53; Virkkunen, Sakari, Suomen presidentit I / Finland&apos;s Presidents I, Otava, 1994, pages 192-193; Salokangas, Raimo, &quot; Itsenäinen tasavalta &quot; / &quot; An Independent Republic, &quot; page 635 in Zetterberg, Seppo et al., eds., Suomen historian pikkujättiläinen / A Small Giant of the Finnish History, WSOY, 2003). } This infuriated the locals, who violently made an end to the meeting. On December 1st the first anti-communist meeting was held, attracting more than 1,000 people demanding and end to all communist activities. [ Activities ] Marches and meetings were arranged throughout the country. On June 16, 1930, more than 3,000 men arrived in Oulu in order to destroy the printing press and office of the Communist newspaper Pohjan Voima. However, the last issue of Pohjan Voima had appeared on June 14. The same day, a Communist printing press in Vaasa was destroyed. A so-called &quot; Peasant March &quot; to Helsinki was a major show of power. More than 12,000 men arrived in Helsinki on July 7. The government yielded under the pressure, and communist newspapers were outlawed in a &quot; Protection of the Republic Act. &quot; Meetings held by leftist and labour groups were also interrupted, often violently. More than 400 meeting locals owned by the labour movement were closed by Lapua activists. [ June 2009 ] One common treatment was &quot; muilutus &quot;, which started with kidnapping and beating. After that the subject was thrown into a car and driven to the border of the Soviet Union. On October 14, 1930, the popular ex-president Kaarlo Juho Ståhlberg and his wife were kidnapped and driven to Joensuu (i.e., not really to the Soviet border this time). After this the general support of the movement collapsed. Moderate people left the movement, and extremists took the stage. Nevertheless, a few months later the Lapua Movement was capable of not only demanding &quot; their man &quot; appointed President of Finland by the Collegium of Electors, which only weeks before had been chosen in nation-wide voting, but a sufficient number of the electors followed the Lapua Movement&apos;s request, disregarding the intentions they had declared during the election campaign. The Movement&apos;s man, Pehr Evind Svinhufvud, was elected. [ Failed rebellion ] In February 1932 a Social Democrat meeting in Mäntsälä was violently interrupted by armed Lapua activists. The event escalated to an attempted coup d&apos;état known as the Mäntsälä rebellion (Mäntsälän kapina), led by the former Chief of Staff of Finland&apos;s army, General Wallenius. Despite the appeals of Wallenius, the army and the White Guards were largely loyal to the government. Many historians believe the main reason for the failure was poor planning. The rebellion ended after President Svinhufvud gave a radio speech to the rebels. After a trial, the Lapua Movement was banned on November 21, 1932. Wallenius and about 50 other leaders were sentenced to prison. Ironically, the banning was done under the Protection of the Republic Act, which originally was dictated by the Lapua Movement. [ Legacy ] In the Soviet Union, the actions of Lapuan liike were closely followed. Old deep-rooted misperceptions of Finland as a threat and as a continuation of the ancient tsarist régime were enhanced among ordinary citizens by the Bolshevist leadership, which further contributed to the conditions leading to the Winter War. In Leningrad, the old tsarist capital, the old concerns over the close proximity of the border were kept alive. Over that border, invasion armies had arrived right at the doorstep of the capital twice in the 18th century and again in 1918, immediately after Finland&apos;s independence, during the ongoing world war, due to Finland&apos;s grudging and unpopular alliance with Germany, who threatened to bring war to the civilians of Leningrad. Russian newspapers propagandized these fears, covering events in Finland and interviewing victims that had been deported to Russia by the Lapua Movement as examples of terror in capitalist countries. [ See also ] Patriotic People&apos;s Movement (Finland) Politics of Finland History of Finland Vaps Movement (Estonia) [ References ] David Kirby (2006) A concise history of Finland. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-53989-0. Category:Finnish nationalism Category:Political history of Finland Category:Lapua ar:حركة لابوا de:Lapua-Bewegung et:Lapua liikumine eu:Lapua Mugimendua fr:Mouvement de Lapua it:Movimento di Lapua nl:Lapua-beweging ja:ラプア運動 no:Lappobevegelsen nn:Lapporørsla pl:Ruch Lapua pt:Movimento de Lapua fi:Lapuan liike sv:Lapporörelsen