[ July 2008 ] Politics of the Republic of Korea takes place in the framework of a semi-presidential representative democratic republic, whereby the President is the head of state, and of a multi-party system. Executive power is exercised by the government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and the National Assembly. The Judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature and comprises a Supreme Court, appellate courts, and a Constitutional Court. Since 1948, the constitution has undergone five major revisions, each signifying a new republic. The current Sixth Republic began with the last major constitutional revision in 1988. [ Executive branch ] | President | Lee Myung-bak | Saenuri Party |25 February 2008|-| Prime Minister | Kim Hwang-sik | Saenuri Party |1 October 2010|}The head of state is the president, who is elected by direct popular vote for a single five-year term. The president is Commander-in-Chief of the armed force of South Korea and enjoys considerable executive powers. The president appoints the prime minister with approval of the National Assembly, as well as appointing and presiding over the State Council of chief ministers as the head of government. On 12 March 2004 the executive power of then president Roh Moo-hyun was suspended when the Assembly voted to impeach him and Prime Minister Goh Kun became an Acting President. On 14 May 2004 the Constitutional Court overturned the impeachment decision made by the Assembly and Roh was reinstated. [ Legislative branch ] The National Assembly ( [ ko 국회 ], [ ko-Hant 國會 ], gukhoe) has 300 members, elected for a four-year term, 244 members in single-seat constituencies and 56 members by proportional representation. [ Political parties and elections ] [ Political parties in South Korea Elections in South Korea ] South Korea elects on national level a head of state – the president – and a legislature. The president is elected for a five year term by the people. The National Assembly (Gukhoe) has 300 members, elected for a four year term, 244 members in single-seat constituencies and 56 members by proportional representation. The main political parties in South Korea are the Democratic United Party, the Saenuri Party, the Unified Progressive Party (UPP), and the Liberty Forward Party (LFP). The conservative Saenuri Party and the more liberal Democrats are the dominant forces of South Korean politics. The socialist UPP is aligned with labour unions and farmer s &apos; groups. [ South Korean presidential election, 2007 ] [ South Korean legislative election, 2012 ] [ Political pressure groups and leaders ] Federation of Korean Industries Federation of Korean Trade Unions Korean Confederation of Trade Unions Korean National Council of Churches Korean Traders Association Korean Veterans&apos; Association National Council of Labor Unions National Democratic Alliance of Korea National Federation of Farmers&apos; Associations National Federation of Student Associations [ Judicial branch ] The South Korean judiciary is independent of the other two branches. The highest judiciary body is the Supreme Court, whose justices are appointed by the president with the consent of the National Assembly. In addition, the Constitutional Court oversees questions of constitutionality. South Korea has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction. [ Administrative divisions ] (Main article: Administrative divisions of South Korea. For historical information, see Provinces of Korea and Special cities of Korea ) One Special City (Teukbyeolsi, Capital City), six Metropolitan Cities (Gwangyeoksi, singular and plural.), nine Provinces (Do, singular and plural) and one Special Autonomous City (Sejong City). Seoul Teukbyeolsi (서울 특별시) Busan Gwangyeoksi (부산 광역시) Daegu Gwangyeoksi (대구 광역시) Incheon Gwangyeoksi (인천 광역시) Daejeon Gwangyeoksi (대전 광역시) Gwangju Gwangyeoksi (광주 광역시) Ulsan Gwangyeoksi (울산 광역시) Gyeonggi-do (경기도) Gangwon-do (강원도) Chungcheongbuk-do (충청북도) Chungcheongnam-do (충청남도) Jeollabuk-do (전라북도) Jeollanam-do (전라남도) Gyeongsangbuk-do (경상북도) Gyeongsangnam-do (경상남도) Jeju Teukbyeoljachi-do (제주특별자치도) Sejong Teukbyeol-jachisi (세종특별자치시) [ International organization participation ] AfDB, APEC, AsDB, BIS, CP, EBRD, ESCAP, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICCt, ICC, ICRM, IDA, IEA (observer), IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, ITUC, MINURSO, NAM (guest), NSG, OAS (observer), OECD, OPCW, OSCE (partner), UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNMOGIP, UNOMIG, UNU, UPU, WCO, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO, Zangger Committee [ See also ] Elections in South Korea Constitution of the Republic of Korea Joseon dynasty politics List of political parties in South Korea South Korea Conservatism in South Korea [ References ] [ External links ] World Factbook: South Korea Cheong Wa Dae National Assembly [ Politics of ] bg:Държавно устройство на Южна Корея es:Política de Corea del Sur fr:Politique de la Corée du Sud ko:대한민국의 정치 lt:Pietų Korėjos politinė sistema ja:大韓民国の政治 pl:Ustrój polityczny Korei Południowej pt:Coreia do Sul#Política zh:韩国政治