[ September 2008 ] [ 41 18 13 S 174 46 57 E type:edu_scale:1000_region:NZ inline,title ] { Roger Moses } { 1550 } { 10 } { 275 } { wellington-college.school.nz } Wellington College is a state secondary school for boys in Mount Victoria in Wellington, New Zealand. [ History ] Opening of the Memorial Hall, Wellington College Cricket game at Wellington College, c. 1900 Wellington College opened in 1867 as Wellington Grammar School in Woodward Street, though Sir George Grey gave the school a deed of endowment in 1853. In 1869 the school moved to a fine new, spired, wooden building on the hills above the central city in Clifton Terrace from where it could be seen from many places in Wellington. { William Main, Wellington Through a Victorian lens revisited, Steele Roberts Publishers, Wellington, 2011, p. 25, the endpapers and the dustjacket. } In 1874 the college opened in a much larger building at its present location. The former boarding establishment at the College, Firth House, was named after Joseph Firth, the headmaster from 1892 to 1921. Wellington College&apos;s Pavilion, Firth House and the Gifford Observatory were opened on 1  December, 1924. The War Memorial Hall was opened on 2  March, 1928, financially supported by £6000 from the Old Boys&apos; Association. { Wellington College. | NZETC } The War Memorial Hall and classroom wings were demolished by the Ministry of Works and replaced in the 1960s with a new hall and seven-storey Tower classroom block due to its lack of earthquake reinforcements. The stained glass window from the front of the War Memorial Hall is now located in the front of the existing hall. During the 1970s the Maths, Library and Technology blocks were opened, replacing the last of the War Memorial Hall building and classroom wings that opened in 1928. Also, the Old Boys Gymnasium was built on the eastern boundary of the campus replacing the swimming pool. In 1980 Firth House was demolished to make way for a new gymnasium which opened in 1982. 1987 saw the opening of the Arts and Music block, and the Brierley Theatre, named after old boy Ron Brierley. The first dedicated computer rooms in the College opened in 1992 in a new building located behind the school hall. 2001 saw the opening of the Science block, on the western boundary of the campus. In 2008 the Languages block opened, also located on the western boundary. The campus also has many prefabricated buildings, some functioning as offices and some as classrooms. The only &quot; historical &quot; buildings remaining on campus to this day are Firth Hall, the Pavilion and the Gifford Observatory. [ About ] Wellington College&apos;s enrolment zone mainly covers the central and western parts of Wellington. Each year the school&apos;s rugby team plays in a competition with Nelson College, Christ&apos;s College, and Wanganui Collegiate School known as the &quot; Quadrangular Tournament &quot;. Wellington are the reigning champions of this tournament and have been since 2003. Their current winning streak of ten titles in a row is the longest in the tournament&apos;s history. [ September 2008 ] The school also competes in a local athletics competition known as &quot; McEvedy Shield &quot; along with St. Patrick&apos;s College (Town), St. Patrick&apos;s College, Silverstream and Rongotai College. Historically, Wellington College have won the shield 48  times since 1922. [ September 2008 ] The 2009 event was won by Wellington College at Newtown Park, but in 2010 St Patrick&apos;s College (Town) won the shield. In 2011, Wellington College won the shield, again. It is next to Wellington East Girls&apos; College, also in Mount Victoria, and shares with that college the Gifford Observatory. Each year in Dunedin, a de facto reunion is held by old boys of the College studying at Otago University. [ May 2008 ] Although Wellington College is situated next to Wellington East Girls&apos; College, its sister college is Wellington Girls&apos; College located in Thorndon. [ Notable alumni ] [ People educated at Wellington College (New Zealand) ] [ The Arts ] Maxwell Fernie - organist, conductor and music teacher Alexander Grant, dancer Dai Henwood - comedian Raybon Kan - writer and comedian Bret McKenzie - Flight of the Conchords Robert J. Pope - songwriter, poet, cricketer Karl Urban - actor [ Broadcasting &amp; amp; journalism ] John Campbell - current events TV host Keith Quinn - TV &amp; radio sports presenter Chris Spence - journalist [ Business ] Sir Ron Brierley - businessman Arthur Myers - businessman, politician Steve Outtrim - businessman Sir Frank Renouf - businessman Alan Gibbs - businessman [ Public service ] Air Marshal Sir Arthur &quot; Mary &quot; Coningham - famous World War II commander and World War I Air Ace. Portrayed in the film Patton. Lord Freyberg of Wellington, Governor-General, World War I VC Winner and World War II Commander. Thomas Gault - Justice of the Supreme Court of New Zealand Lord Grey of Naunton, last Governor of Northern Ireland (also attended Scots College ) Sir Michael Hardie Boys - former Governor-General of New Zealand Don Hunn CNZM - senior New Zealand diplomat, civil servant, and State Services Commissioner Ngatata Love - academic and Treaty negotiator Rex Mason - politician Sir Matthew Oram - lawyer, politician, Speaker of Parliament Sir Paul Reeves - former Governor-General of New Zealand Adrian G. Rodda - senior civil servant and Chairman of the State Services Commission Dr William Ball Sutch, New Zealand public servant, put on trial for espionage [ Science ] George Leslie Adkin - farmer, geologist, ethnologist, photographer, and environmentalist. Ian Foster - computer scientist William Pickering - former Head of the NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory (space scientist) Prof Tony Raine (1949–1995) - distinguished nephrologist Philip Robertson - chemist, university professor and writer Jonathan Sarfati - creationist, scientist, and New Zealand Chess Champion [ Sport ] Leo Bertos - football (soccer) player with the Wellington Phoenix and New Zealand All Whites. Harry Boam - cricketer, plays for Wellington Firebirds George Bridgewater - New Zealand rower Tim Brown - football (soccer) player with the Wellington Phoenix and New Zealand All Whites. Ross Durant - football (soccer) player for New Zealand All Whites Simon Elliott - football (soccer) player with the San Jose Earthquakes and New Zealand All Whites Marc Ellis - former All Black, entertainer, businessman James Franklin - cricketer, plays for Black Caps and Wellington Firebirds Onny Parun - tennis player Lima Sopoaga - rugby player with the Wellington Lions in the ITM Cup and Highlanders in Super Rugby Peter Taylor - New Zealand rower Neemia Tialata - All Black Filo Tiatia - rugby player [ References ] 2. A.W Beasley, The Light Accepted : 125 Years of Wellington College, Board of Trustees of Wellington College, Wellington, 1992 [ External links ] Official website Source for examination results Wellington College and the First World War (from the Ministry of Culture and Heritage) St Pats take McEvedy Shield College Student Site Map showing school (1892 Thos Ward Map No 76; low definition version) Category:Boys&apos; schools in New Zealand Category:Educational institutions established in 1867 Category:Secondary schools in the Wellington Region Category:Schools in Wellington City Category:Cricket grounds in New Zealand