[ CarolinaWolfSpider_02.jpg 250px Large Carolina Wolf Spider; Hogna carolinensis Animal ia Arthropod a Arachnid a Araneae Lycosoidea Lycosidae Sundevall, 1833 List of Lycosidae species &gt; 100 genera, c. 2,300 species Distribution.lycosidae.1.png 250px Genera Acantholycosa Adelocosa Allocosa Alopecosa Arctosa Geolycosa Hogna Lycosa Mongolicosa Pardosa Pirata Sibirocosa Sosippus Trochosa many more ] Wolf spiders are members of the family Lycosidae, from the Ancient Greek word &quot; [ grc λύκος ] &quot; meaning &quot; wolf &quot;. They are robust and agile hunters with good eyesight. They live mostly solitary lives and hunt alone. Some are opportunistic hunters pouncing upon prey as they find it or even chasing it over short distances. Some will wait for passing prey in or near the mouth of a burrow. Wolf spiders resemble Nursery web spider s (family Pisauridae), but they carry their egg sacs by attaching them to their spinneret s (Pisauridae carry their egg sacs with their chelicerae and pedipalp s ). Two of the Wolf spider&apos;s eight eyes are large and prominent, which distinguishes them from the Nursery web spiders whose eyes are all of approximately equal size. [ Description ] Eye configuration of a &apos;&apos;Hogna&apos;&apos; species There are many genera of wolf spider, ranging in body size from less than [ 1 to 30 mm 2 ]. [ http://www.australasian-arachnology.org/arachnology/araneae/lycosidae Wolf Spiders: Lycosidae Sundevall 1833 Australasian Arachnology Society 2 October 2008 ] They have eight eyes arranged in three rows. The bottom row consists of four small eyes, the middle row has two very large eyes (which distinguishes them from the Pisauridae ), and the top row has two medium-sized eyes. They depend on their excellent eyesight to hunt. They also possess an acute sense of touch. Their eyes reflect light well, allowing someone with a flashlight to easily hunt for them at night. Flashing a beam of light over the spider will produce eyeshine. The light from the flashlight has been reflected from the spider&apos;s eyes directly back toward its source, producing a &quot; glow &quot; that is easily noticed. This is also especially helpful because the wolf spiders are nocturnal and will be out hunting for food, making it easier to find them. Wolf spider carrying her young Wolf spiders are unique in the way that they carry their eggs. The egg sac, a round silken globe, is attached to the spinnerets at the end of the abdomen, allowing the spider to carry her unborn young with her. The abdomen must be held in a raised position to keep the egg case from dragging on the ground, however despite this handicap they are still capable of hunting. Another aspect unique to wolf spiders is their method of infant care. Immediately after the spiderlings emerge from their protective silken case, they clamber up their mother&apos;s legs and crowd onto her abdomen. Because they depend on camouflage for protection, they do not have the flashy appearance of some other kinds of spiders. In general their coloration is appropriate to their favorite habitat. Hogna is the genus with the largest of the wolf spiders. Among the Hogna species in the U.S., the nearly solid dark brown H. carolinensis (Carolina wolf spider) is the largest, with a body that can be more than one inch long. It is sometimes confused with H. helluo, which is somewhat smaller and different in coloration. The underside of H. carolinensis is solid black, but the underside of H. helluo is variegated and has a reds, oranges, and yellows with shades to black. Some members of the Lycosidae, such as H. carolinensis, make deep tubular burrows in which they lurk much of the time. Others, such as H. helluo, seek shelter under rocks and other shelters as nature may provide. They may wander from place to place, and are therefore more likely to be the ones attracted into human habitation when the weather starts to turn colder in autumn. There are many smaller wolf spiders. They live on pastures and fields and are an important natural control on harmful insects. [ Toxicity ] Wolf spiders are capable of defensive bites, and some South American species may give bites that are medically significant. Nevertheless, the presence of wolf spiders generally works in favor of humans because they consume insects. [ http://lancaster.unl.edu/pest/resources/wolfspider.shtml Wolf Spiders in Nebraska UNL Extension-Lancaster County ] Wolf spiders will inject venom freely if continually provoked. Symptoms of their venomous bite include swelling, mild pain and itching. Though usually considered harmless to humans, the bite of some species may be painful. In the past, necrotic bites have been attributed to some South America n species, but further investigation has indicated that those problems that did occur were probably actually due to bites by members of other genera. [ Ribeiro L. A. Jorge M. T. Piesco R. V. Nishioka S. A. 1990 Wolf spider bites in São Paulo, Brazil: A clinical and epidemiological study of 515 cases Toxicon 28 6 715–717 10.1016/0041-0101(90)90260-E ] Australian wolf spiders have also been associated with necrotic wounds, but careful study has likewise shown them not to produce such results. [ Isbister Geoffrey K. Framenau Volker W. 2004 Australian Wolf Spider Bites (Lycosidae): Clinical Effects and Influence of Species on Bite Circumstances Clinical Toxicology 42 2 153–161 10.1081/CLT-120030941 ] [ Habitats ] Wolf spiders can be found in a wide range of habitats both coastal and inland. These include shrublands, woodland, wet coastal forest, alpine meadows, and suburban gardens. Spiderlings disperse aerially and consequently wolf spiders have wide distributions. Although some species have very specific microhabitat needs (such as stream-side gravel beds or montane herb-fields) most are wanderers without permanent homes. Some build burrow s which can be opened or have a trapdoor. Arid zone species construct turrets or plug their holes with leaves and pebbles during the rainy season to protect themselves from flood waters. [ Gallery ] Wolf spider carrying her egg sac. Wolf spider. Wolf spider carrying her young. Burrowing wolf spider defending its egg sac. Wolf spider carrying egg sac Wolf Spider in Maricopa City, Arizona, roughly 25mm (1 inch) while legs were retracted Large Wolf Spider with young in Michigan. (Probably Hogna carolinensis.) [ Footnotes ] [ References ] [ Platnick, Norman I. ] (2008): The world spider catalog, version 8.5. American Museum of Natural History. [ External links ] [ Lycosidae ] [ Lycosidae ] Wolf Spider Fact Sheet Article from the University of Kentucky |Factors Factors influencing escape behaviors of some wolf spiders ar:العنكبوت الذئب ca:Licòsid cs:Slíďákovití da:Jagtedderkopper de:Wolfspinnen nv:Naʼashjéʼiitsoh et:Huntämbliklased es:Lycosidae fr:Lycosidae it:Lycosidae he:זאבניים lt:Plėšriavoriai hu:Farkaspókfélék ms:Labah-labah serigala nl:Wolfspinnen ja:コモリグモ no:Lycosidae pl:Pogońcowate pt:Aranha-lobo ro:Lycosidae ru:Пауки-волки simple:Wolf spider fi:Juoksuhämähäkit sv:Vargspindlar tr:Lycosidae vi:Lycosidae zh-yue:狼蛛科 zh:狼蛛