[ Wandering spider.jpg Phoneutria nigriventer 250px Animal ia Arthropod a Arachnid a Araneae Ctenidae Phoneutria Perty, 1833 List of Ctenidae species#Phoneutria 8 species Phoneutria fera Perty, 1833 250px Species P.  bahiensis (Simó &amp; Brescovit, 2001) P.  boliviensis ( F. O. Pickard-Cambridge, 1897) P.  eickstedtae (Martins &amp; Bertani, 2007) P.  fera ( Perty, 1833) P.  keyserlingi (F. O. Pickard-Cambridge], 1897) P.  nigriventer ( Keyserling, 1891) P.  pertyi (F. O. Pickard-Cambridge, 1897) P.  reidyi (F. O. Pickard-Cambridge, 1897) ] Phoneutria, commonly known as Brazilian wandering spiders, armed spiders ( &quot; aranhas-armadeiras &quot;, as they are known in Portuguese ), or banana spiders (not to be confused with the relatively harmless species of the genus Nephila ), are a genus of defensive and highly venomous spider s found in tropical South and Central America. These spiders are members of the Ctenidae family of wandering spiders. The Brazilian wandering spiders appeared in Guinness World Records 2012 as the world&apos;s most venom ous spider. { Several venomous species of arachnid are far more likely to attack a human, and the Guinness book of World Records actually states that although the Brazilian wandering spider is the most toxic, more deaths actually occur from black widow and brown recluse spider bites, due to the rarity of the Wandering spider actually biting anyone. } [ January 2010 ] [ Herzig V, John Ward R, Ferreira dos Santos W Intersexual variations in the venom of the Brazilian &quot; armed &quot; spider Phoneutria nigriventer (Keyserling, 1891) Toxicon 40 10 1399 –406 2002 12368110 10.1016/S0041-0101(02)00136-8 ] [ Description ] The genus Phoneutria (Greek for &quot; Murderess &quot; ) contains eight scientifically described species. The Brazilian wandering spiders can grow to have a leg span of up to 13–15  cm (4–5  in). Their body length ranges from 17 to 48  mm (0.7–1.9  in). { Martins &amp; Bertani 2007 } The genus is distinguished from other related genera such as Ctenus by the presence of dense prolateral scapulae on the pedipalp tibiae and tarsi in both sexes. Phoneutria are especially easily confused with Cupiennius, in which some species (such as the recently described C. chiapanensis) also have red hairs on the chelicerae. Wandering spider s are so-called because they wander the jungle floor at night, rather than residing in a lair or maintaining a web. During the day they hide inside termite mounds, under fallen logs and rocks, and in banana plants and bromeliad s. P.  nigriventer is known to hide in dark and moist places in or near human dwellings. P.  nigriventer mates during the dry season from April to June, which leads to frequent observations of the species during this time. They have a distinctive defensive display in which the body is lifted up into an erect position, the first two pairs of legs are lifted high (revealing the conspicuous black-striped pattern on their underside), while the spider sways from side to side with hind legs in a cocked position. [ Distribution ] Phoneutria are found in forests from Costa Rica throughout South America east of the Andes into northern Argentina, including Colombia, Venezuela, the Guianas, Ecuador, Peru, Bolivia, Brazil and Paraguay. Two species (P.  reidyi and P.  boliviensis) are found from southern Central America to the Amazon region, while one species (P.  fera) is restricted to the Amazon. The remaining species are restricted to Atlantic Forest of Argentina, Paraguay and Brazil, including forest fragments in the Cerrado (savanna). In Brazil, Phoneutria is only absent in the northeastern region north of Salvador, Bahia. Phoneutria has been introduced to Chile and Uruguay. [ Species ] [ 2012 As of early 2012 ], this genus contains eight species: { The world spider catalog, version 12.5. American Museum of Natural History. Accessed March 30, 2012. } Phoneutria bahiensis Simó &amp; Brescovit, 2001 — Atlantic rainforest of Brazil. Phoneutria boliviensis ( F. O. Pickard-Cambridge, 1897) — Central, South America. Phoneutria eickstedtae Martins &amp; Bertani, 2007 — Brazil Phoneutria fera Perty, 1833 — Ecuador, Peru, Brazil, Surinam, Guyana. Phoneutria keyserlingi (F. O. Pickard-Cambridge], 1897) — Atlantic rainforest of Brazil. Phoneutria nigriventer ( Keyserling, 1891) — Brazil, northern Argentina; introduced to Uruguay. Phoneutria pertyi (F. O. Pickard-Cambridge, 1897) — Atlantic rainforest of Brazil. Phoneutria reidyi (F. O. Pickard-Cambridge, 1897) — Venezuela, Peru, Brazil, Guyana. [ Toxicity ] P. fera is widely considered the most venomous species of spider. Its venom contains a potent neurotoxin, known as PhTx3, which acts as a broad-spectrum calcium channel blocker that inhibits glutamate release, calcium uptake and also glutamate uptake in neural synapses. At deadly concentrations, this neurotoxin causes loss of muscle control and breathing problems, resulting in paralysis and eventual asphyxiation. In addition, the venom causes intense pain and inflammation following a bite due to an excitatory effect the venom has on the serotonin 5-HT4 receptors of sensory nerves. This sensory nerve stimulation causes a release of neuropeptides such as substance P which triggers inflammation and pain. { Phoneutria nigriventer spider venom activates 5-HT4 receptors in rat-isolated vagus nerve } Aside from causing intense pain, the venom of the spider can also cause priapism in humans. Erections resulting from the bite are uncomfortable, can last for many hours and can lead to impotence. A component of the venom ( Tx2-6 ) is being studied for use in erectile dysfunction treatments. { &quot; Natural Viagra: Brazilian Spider Bite Causes Hours-Long Erection &quot;. } { FoxNews, May 1, 2007. Accessed May 6, 2007. } { Natural Viagra: Spider bite causes prolonged erection. Live Science, April 30, 2007. Accessed March 30, 2012. } The amount of P. nigriventer venom necessary to kill a 20  g mouse has been shown to be only 6  μg intravenously and 134  μg subcutaneously as compared to 110  μg and 200  μg respectively for Latrodectus mactans (Southern black widow). This ranks Phoneutria venom among the most deadly spider venoms to mice. Laboratory mice subjected to P. nigriventer venom experienced intense penile erections before succumbing to the toxin. { Venomous Animals and their Venoms&apos;&apos;, vol. III, ed. Wolfgang Bücherl and Eleanor Buckley } [ Danger to humans ] Phoneutria includes some of the relatively few species of spiders known to present a threat to human beings. Danger to humans is not merely a question of toxicity, but requires the capacity to deliver the venom, a sufficient quantity of venom, a disposition that makes a bite likely and proximity to human habitation. The actual incidence of death or serious injury must also be considered. Spider mouthparts are adapted to envenomate very small prey; they are not well-adapted to attacking large mammals such as humans. A study in March 2009 suggests that Phoneutria inject venom in approximately one-third of their bites, and only a small quantity in one-third of those cases. Research in this area is hindered by the difficulty of identifying particular species. Of the eight-described species, P.  nigriventer and P.  fera most frequently receive mention in mass-media publications. P.  nigriventer is the species responsible for most cases of venom intoxication in Brazil because it is commonly found in highly populated areas of southeastern Brazil, such as the states of São Paulo, Minas Gerais, Rio de Janeiro and Espírito Santo. The species P.  fera is native to the northern portion of South America in the Amazon of Brazil, Venezuela, Ecuador, Peru and the Guyanas. The spider&apos;s wandering nature is another reason it is considered so dangerous. In densely populated areas, Phoneutria species usually search for cover and dark places to hide during daytime, leading it to hide within houses, clothes, cars, boots, boxes and log piles, thus generating accidents when people disturb it. Its other common name, &quot; banana spider &quot;, comes from its tendency to hide in banana bunches or plantations, and it is occasionally found as a stowaway within shipments of bananas. These spiders can also appear in banana crates sent to grocery stores and bulk food centers around the world. One such instance happened in 2005 with a shipment of bananas arriving at Bridgwater, England, when a man was bitten by a P. fera; however, due to quick medical care he survived, taking nearly a week to recover from the bite following treatment. { BBC, 2005 } Despite their reputation as the world&apos;s deadliest spiders, there are multiple studies that call into question their capacity for fatal human envenomation, though some of these are labeled with a level of uncertainty, as Phoneutrias can easily be confused with other species such as the Lycosides or other large labidognatha spiders. One study suggested that only 2.3 percent of bites (mainly in children) were serious enough to require antivenom. { Bucaretchi et al., 2000 } However, other studies, as cited in the Wolfgang Bücherl studies, showed that the toxicity of Phoneutria venom was clearly more virulent than both Latrodectus and Atrax. Many experts believe that various spiders like Phoneutria can deliver a &quot; dry &quot; bite to purposely conserve their venom, as opposed to a more primitive spider like Atrax that usually delivers a full load. Nevertheless, there are well-attested instances of death. In one case, a single spider killed two children in São Sebastião. The spider was positively identified as a Phoneutria by Wolfgang Bücherl. [ Footnotes ] [ External links ] [ Phoneutria nigriventer ] [ 2 ] Venomous South American spider found in Manitoba grocery store CBC News Spider gives pupils the creeps BBC News Online Deadly spider found in banana box BBC News Online Spider found between bananas in Dutch supermarket Pub chef bitten by deadly spider BBC News Online Camera phone saves man from deadly spider Web used to trace deadly spider BBC News Online An illustrative set of pictures of &apos;&apos;Ctenidae&apos;&apos; Picture of &apos;&apos;P.  nigriventer&apos;&apos; Potential drug for erectile dysfunction Spider Venom Could Boost Sex Life BBC News Online Spider killed in danish supermarket Brazilian wandering spider killed in Dutch hypermarket Deadly spider found in Co-op bananas England &apos;World&apos;s Deadliest Spider&apos; Found in Whole Foods Produce Section. Category:Ctenidae Category:Spiders of South America Category:Venomous spiders ar:عنكبوت برازيلي جوال br:Phoneutria (kevnid) de:Phoneutria eo:Brazila migra araneo fr:Phoneutria he:עכביש נודד ברזילאי hu:Brazil vándorpók nl:Braziliaanse zwerfspin pl:Wałęsak brazylijski pt:Armadeira sl:Brazilski potujoči pajek fi:Brasilianvaeltajahämähäkit