{ Sede vacante device, used by the } { Holy See from a Pope&apos;s death to the election of his successor } Sedevacantism (derived from the Latin words meaning &quot; empty chair &quot; { Richard John Neuhaus, Catholic Matters: Confusion, Controversy, and the Splendor of Truth, page 133 (Basic Books, 2007). ISBN 0-465-04935-4 } ) is the position, held by a minority of Traditionalist Catholics, { R. Scott Appleby, &apos;&apos;Being Right: Conservative Catholics in America&apos;&apos; (Indiana University Press 1995 ISBN 978-0-253-32922-6), p. 257 } { Martin E. Marty, R. Scott Appleby, &apos;&apos;Fundamentalisms Observed&apos;&apos; (University of Chicago Press 1994 ISBN 978-0-226-50878-8), p. 88 } that the present occupant of the papal see is not truly Pope and that, for lack of a valid Pope, the see has been vacant since the death of either Pope Pius XII in 1958 or Pope John XXIII in 1963. Some sedevacantists claim that the vacancy goes back further. Sedevacantists believe that Paul VI (1963–1978), John Paul I (1978), John Paul II (1978–2005) and Benedict XVI (since 2005) have been neither true Catholics nor true Pope s, by virtue of allegedly having espoused the heresy of Modernism, or of having otherwise denied or contradicted solemnly defined Catholic dogmas. Some of them classify John XXIII (1958–1963) also as a Modernist antipope. The term &quot; sedevacantism &quot; is derived from the Latin phrase sede vacante, which literally means &quot; the seat being vacant &quot;, the seat in question being that of a bishop. A specific use of the phrase is in the context of the vacancy of the Holy See between the death or resignation of a Pope and the election of his successor. &quot; Sedevacantism &quot; as a term in English appears to date from the 1980s, though the movement itself is older. { See this article by sedevacantist priest Fr. Antony Cekada. } Among those who maintain that the see of Rome, occupied by what they declare to be an illegitimate pope, was really vacant, some have chosen an alternative pope of their own, and thus in their view ended the vacancy of the see. They are sometimes called &quot; conclavists &quot;. [ Early history ] One of the earliest proponents of sedevacantism was the American Francis Schuckardt. Though he was still working within the &quot; official &quot; Church in 1967, he publicly took the position in 1968 that the Holy See was vacant and that the Church that had emerged from the Second Vatican Council was no longer Catholic. { http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Francis_Schuckardt#Tridentine_Latin_Rite_Catholic_Church } An associate of his, Daniel Q. Brown, arrived at the same conclusion. In 1969, Brown received episcopal orders from an Old Catholic bishop, and in 1971 he in turn consecrated Schuckardt. Schuckardt founded a congregation called the Tridentine Latin Rite Catholic Church. In 1970, a Japanese layman, Yukio Nemoto (1925–1988), created a sedevacantist group called Seibo No Mikuni. { Seibo No Mikuni (Zoccatelli) — CESNUR } Another founding figure of sedevacantism was Fr. Joaquín Sáenz y Arriaga, a Jesuit theologian from Mexico. He put forward sedevacantist ideas in his books The New Montinian Church (August 1971) and Sede Vacante (1973). Sáenz&apos;s writings gave rise to the sedevacantist movement in Mexico, led by Sáenz, Fr. Moisés Carmona and Fr. Adolfo Zamora, and also inspired Fr. Francis E. Fenton in the United States. In the years following the Second Vatican Council other priests took up similar positions. They include: The Dominican theologian Fr. Michel Louis Guérard des Lauriers, who developed a thesis similar to sedevacantism called sedeprivationism in the 1970s. Several students at the SSPX seminary at Econe in the early or mid-1970s — Daniel Dolan, Anthony Cekada and Donald Sanborn — are reported to have been sedevacantists in that period and were expelled together with three others from the SSPX by Archbishop Lefebvre for holding the error. The English parish priest Fr. Oswald Baker, who was a sedevacantist at least by 1982, This being the date of the compilation of church bulletins quoted on this page and reportedly some time before that. The American missionary Fr. Lucian Pulvermacher, who left the Roman Catholic Church in 1976 and in October 1998 was elected Pope of the conclavist &quot; True Catholic Church &quot; with the name of &quot; Pius XIII &quot;. [ Positions ] Sedevacantism owes its origins to the rejection of the theological and disciplinary changes implemented following the Second Vatican Council (1962–1965). { Patrick Madrid, Pete Vere, More Catholic Than the Pope: An Inside Look at Extreme Traditionalism, page 169 (Our Sunday Visitor, Inc., 2004). ISBN 1-931709-26-2 } Sedevacantists reject this Council, on the basis of its documents on ecumenism and religious liberty, which they see as contradicting the traditional teachings of the Catholic Church and as denying the unique mission of Catholicism as the one true religion, outside of which there is no salvation. [ March 2011 ] They also say that new disciplinary norms, such as the Mass of Paul VI, promulgated on 3 April 1969, undermine or conflict with the historical Catholic faith and are deemed heresies. { Frank K. Flinn, Encyclopedia of Catholicism, page 566 (Facts on File, Inc., 2007). ISBN 978-0-8160-5455-8 } Other traditionalist Catholics recognize as legitimate the line of Popes leading to Pope Benedict XVI. { David Gibson, The Rule of Benedict: Pope Benedict XVI and His Battle with the Modern World, page 355 (HarperCollins, 2007). ISBN 978-0-06-116122-3 } Some of them hold that one or more of the most recent Popes have held and taught unorthodox beliefs, but do not go so far as to say that they have been formal heretics or have been widely and publicly judged to be heretics. [ March 2011 ] Sedevacantists, on the other hand, claim that the infallible Magisterium of the Catholic Church could not have decreed the changes made in the name of the Second Vatican Council, and conclude that those who issued these changes could not have been acting with the authority of the Catholic Church. { Martin E. Marty, R. Scott Appleby, Fundamentalisms Observed, page 66 (The University of Chicago Press, 1991). ISBN 0-226-50878-1 } Accordingly, they hold that Pope Paul VI and his successors left the true Catholic Church and thus lost legitimate authority in the Church. A formal heretic, they say, cannot be the Catholic Pope. { Daniel Wójcik, The End of the World As We Know It: Faith, Fatalism, and Apocalypse in America, page 86 (New York University Press, 1997). ISBN 0-8147-9283-9 } Claims used by sedevacantists to defend their position include the following: [ March 2011 ] Most pre-Conciliar Catholic theologians and canon lawyers taught that it is inherently impossible for a heretic to hold the papal office. Particular provisions of Church law prevent a heretic from being elected or remaining as Pope. Paul IV &apos;s 1559 Bull Cum ex apostolatus officio stipulated that a heretic cannot be elected Pope, while Canon 188.4 of the 1917 Code of Canon Law provides that a cleric who publicly defects from the Catholic faith automatically loses any office that he holds in the Church. A number of writers have engaged sedevacantists in debate on some of these points. Brian Harrison of Puerto Rico, for example, has argued that Pope Pius XII&apos;s conclave legislation permitted excommunicated cardinals to attend, from which he argues that they could also be legitimately elected. Opponents of Harrison have argued that a phrase in Pope Pius XII&apos;s legislation &quot; Cardinals who have been deposed or who have resigned, however, are barred and may not be reinstated even for the purpose of voting &quot;, though it speaks of someone deposed or resigned from the cardinalate, not of someone who may have incurred automatic excommunication but has not been officially declared excommunicated, means that, even if someone is permitted to attend, that does not automatically translate into electability. [ March 2011 ] There are estimated to be between several tens of thousands and more than two hundred thousands of sedevacantists worldwide, mostly concentrated in the United States, Canada, France, the United Kingdom, Italy, and Australia, but the actual size of the sedevacantist movement has never been accurately assessed. [ March 2011 ] (See further the section on statistics in the article Traditionalist Catholic.) Catholic doctrine teaches that the four marks of the true Church are that it is one, holy, catholic, and apostolic, and sedevacantists base their claim to be the remnant Roman Catholic Church on what they see as the presence in them of these four &quot; marks &quot;, absent, they say, in the Church since the Second Vatican Council. [ March 2011 ] Their critics counter by saying that sedevacantists are in fact not one, forming numerous splinter groups, each of them in disagreement with the others. [ March 2011 ] Most sedevacantists hold the holy orders conferred with the present revised rites of the Catholic Church to be invalid due to defect both of intention and form. [ March 2011 ] They conclude that the great majority of the bishop s listed in the Holy See &apos;s Annuario Pontificio, including Benedict XVI himself, are in reality merely priests or even laymen. [ March 2011 ] [ Bishops and holy orders ] Catholic doctrine holds that any bishop can validly ordain any baptised man to the priesthood or to the episcopacy, provided that he has the correct intention and uses a doctrinally acceptable rite of ordination, whether or not he has official permission of any sort to perform the ordination, and indeed whether or not he and the ordinand are Catholics [ August 2009 ]. On the other hand, while unapproved and irregular ordinations are valid in that the recipient truly becomes a priest or bishop, they are canonically illegal (or illicit), and can entail penalties under church law for those involved. Absent specified conditions, Canon law forbids ordination to the episcopate without a mandate from the Pope, { canon 1013 } and both those who confer such ordination without the papal mandate and those who receive it are subject to excommunication. { canon 1382 } Sedevacantists take the position that the normal legal requirements, such as the need for a papal mandate for an episcopal consecration, cannot be applied in the context of a collapse of the Church&apos;s structures and the prolonged lack of a Pope. [ March 2011 ] In a specific pronouncement in 1976, the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith declared devoid of canonical effect the consecration ceremony conducted for the Palmarian Catholic Church by Archbishop Ngô Ðình Thuc on 31 December 1975, though it refrained from pronouncing on its validity. This declaration applied also to later ordinations by those who received ordination in the ceremony. { &quot; As for those who have already thus unlawfully received ordination or any who may yet accept ordination from these, whatever may be the validity of the orders (quidquid sit de ordinum validitate), the Church does not and will not recognize their ordination (ipsorum ordinationem), and will consider them, for all legal effects, as still in the state in which they were before, except that the… penalties remain until they repent &quot; (Sacred } { Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, Decree Episcopi qui alios of 17 September 1976 — Acta Apostolicae Sedis 1976, page 623). } Of those then ordained, seven who are known to have returned to full communion with Rome did so as laymen. { See Thuc Consecrations } Again, when Archbishop Emmanuel Milingo conferred episcopal ordination on four men in Washington on 24 September 2006, the Holy See&apos;s Press Office declared that &quot; the Church does not recognize and does not intend in the future to recognize these ordinations or any ordinations derived from them, and she holds that the canonical state of the four alleged bishops is the same as it was prior to the ordination. &quot; { Declaration in Italian and English } This denial of canonical status simply means that he has no authority to exercise any ministry.However, the Rev. Ciro Benedettini of the Holy See Press Office, who was responsible for publicly issuing, during the press conference, the communique on Milingo, stated to reporters that any ordinations the excommunicated Milingo had performed prior to his laicization were &quot; illicit but valid &quot;, while any subsequent ordinations would be invalid. [ http://articles.boston.com/2009-12-18/news/29255245_1_archbishop-milingo-ordaining-ordinations December 18, 2009 Frances D&apos;Emilio Vatican dismisses defiant archbishop from clergy Boston Globe ] [ John L. Allen Jr. Last act in the Milingo story? December 17, 2009 http://ncronline.org/blogs/ncr-today/last-act-milingo-story ] On June 11, 2011, the Pontifical Council for Legislative Texts issued a statement regarding episcopal consecrations in China, saying that the penalty of excommunication imposed by law on those who consecrate or are consecrated without a papal mandate &quot; must be tempered or a penance employed in its place &quot; when those involved in the intrinsically evil act are &quot; coerced by grave fear, even if only relatively grave, or due to necessity or grave inconvenience &quot;. It recalled that absolution from the excommunication in question is reserved to the Holy See. Bishop Juan Ignacio Arrieta, Secretary of the Pontifical Council, explained that the statement applied to the bishops ordained by Milingo and Thuc as well as to the Chinese cases. [ http://www.zenit.org/article-32850?l%3Denglish Vatican Calls China&apos;s Illicitly Ordained to Examine Hearts Jesús Colina June 14, 2011 ZENIT News Agency ] The bishops who are or have been active within the sedevacantist movement can be divided into four categories. Bishops consecrated within the &quot; official &quot; Church who were subsequently persuaded to the sedevacantist position. To date, this category seems to consist of only two individuals, both now deceased: the Vietnamese Archbishop Ngô Ðình Thuc (who, before he died in 1984, may have been reconciled to Pope John Paul II) and the Chicago-born Mgr. Alfredo F. Mendez, the former Bishop of Arecibo, Puerto Rico. The late Bishop Antônio de Castro Mayer of Campos, Brazil is also said to have embraced, or at least flirted with, sedevacantism, despite his association with the non-sedevacantist Society of St. Pius X. Bishops whose lineages derive from the foregoing bishops, which essentially means the &quot; Thuc line &quot; of bishops deriving from Archbishop Ngô Ðình Thuc. While the &quot; Thuc line &quot; is lengthy and complex, reportedly comprising 200 or more individuals, See list and line of descent at Thuc Consecratons the sedevacantist community generally accepts and respects most of the 12 or so bishops following from the three or four final consecrations that the Archbishop performed (those of Bishops Guerard des Lauriers, Carmona, Zamora and Datessen). Bishop Mendez consecrated one priest to the episcopacy, Fr. Clarence Kelly of the Society of St. Pius V, The Most Reverend Clarence Kelly, Sacred and Profane (Oyster Bay Cove, NY: 1997), 101. http://congregationofstpiusv.net/SacredandProfane.pdf who in turn has consecrated one further bishop. See photos of consecration at http://www.stpiusvchapel.org/photos/consecration2/consecration2.html In addition, many bishops in the &quot; Thuc line &quot; are or have been associated with the conclavist Palmarian Catholic Church. On September 24, 1991, Father Pivarunas was consecrated a bishop at Mount Saint Michael by Bishop Moises Carmona. On November 30, 1993, Bishop Pivarunas conferred episcopal consecration to Father Daniel Dolan in Cincinnati, Ohio, and on May 11, 1999, he also consecrated Martin Davila for the Union Catolica Treno to succeed Moises Carmona. Bishops whose lineages derive from earlier schisms. A considerable number of sedevacantist bishops are said to derive from Bishop Carlos Duarte Costa, who in 1945 set up his own schismatic &quot; Brazilian Catholic Apostolic Church &quot;. For the many who look to him as the origin of their episcopal orders see Costa Consecrations. More numerous are those who have had recourse to the Old Catholic line of succession. Bishops of this category include Francis Schuckardt and others associated with him. The orders of the original Old Catholic Church are regarded by the Roman Catholic Church as valid, though no such declaration of recognition has been issued with regard to the several Independent Catholic Churches that claim to trace their episcopal orders to this Church. Some shadow of doubt hovers over the validity of the orders received from these bishops, and the claimants have not received wide acceptance in the sedevacantist community, though most have at least some small congregation. Bishops whose orders are generally regarded as invalid through lack of proper lineage. Lucian Pulvermacher and Gordon Bateman of the small conclavist true Catholic Church fall into this category. [ Criticism ] Against sedevacantism, mainstream Catholics advance arguments such as: [ March 2011 ] [ March 2011 ] [ March 2011 ] [ Matthew 16:18 ] [ March 2011 ] [ March 2011 ] [ March 2011 ] According to Catholic doctrine, the Catholic Church is a visible identifiable body that is literally catholic, in the sense of universal ( &quot; for all people &quot; ). This is seen as incompatible with the sedevacantist claim that the true nature of the Catholic Church has been hidden from the world for half a century. The Church The 1870 Dogmatic Constitution Pastor Aeternus &apos;&apos;Pastor Aeternus&apos;&apos; of the First Vatican Council reaffirmed that &quot; it has always been necessary for every Church  — that is to say, the faithful throughout the world  — to be in agreement with (the Roman Church) because of its preeminent authority &quot; and that consequently the bishop whom the Church in Rome acknowledges as its head &quot; is the successor of blessed Peter, the prince of the apostles, true vicar of Christ, head of the whole Church and father and teacher of all Christian people. To him, in blessed Peter, full power has been given by our lord Jesus Christ to tend, rule and govern the universal Church. &quot; This is seen as incompatible with the sedevacantist claim that the papal line of succession has been broken since 1958 (or 1963). Critics of sedevacantism argue that this also means that the theory advanced by the seventeenth-century theologian and Doctor of the Church Robert Bellarmine that a Pope who fell into heresy would automatically forfeit his office and could be formally deposed has been overruled by Church authority by Benedict XIV in &quot; De Synodo Dioecesano &quot; (10,1,5) and by the 1917 Code of Canon Law, Can. 2232, Par. 1, &quot; A penalty that is latae sententiae, whether medicinal or punitive, holds for one who is aware of his own delict in both fora [i.e., public and private]; but prior to a declaratory sentence, the delinquent is excused from observing the penalty any time that he cannot observe it without infamy, and in the external forum no one can compel the observance of that penalty from him unless the delict is notorious, with due regard for Can. 2223, Par. 4. &quot; Sedevacantist appeals to Bellarmine&apos;s authority in this point accordingly could not be sustained. They add that Bellarmine envisaged that such a deposition, even if possible, could only be undertaken by a significant body of the Church including many bishops and cardinals, rather than by a few individuals. The Catholic doctrine of the indefectibility of the Church, which appeals to Christ&apos;s promise to the Apostle Peter in ( &quot; You are Peter (the Rock), and on this rock I will build my church, and the gates of hell will not prevail against it &quot; ) excludes the possibility that the Catholic bishops around the world and the Pope with whom they are in communion would succumb to heresy and fall from office. They say that sedevacantists wrongly treat certain papal statements of the past as if they were &apos;&apos;ex cathedra&apos;&apos; declarations. They claim that sedevacantists fail to distinguish between matters of discipline  — such as the use of Latin and of the Tridentine Mass  — which can be reformed at any time, and infallible dogmatic teachings. They say that sedevacantists indulge in the logical fallacy of post hoc ergo propter hoc when they attribute problems that the Church has experienced in the Western world since the reforms of the Second Vatican Council to the reforms themselves rather than to the general decrease in religiosity in the West. Sedevacantists advance counter-arguments, such as: [ March 2011 ] [ March 2011 ] [ March 2011 ] [ March 2011 ] [ March 2011 ] [ March 2011 ] They deny that they implicitly repudiate the dogma of papal infallibility as defined at the First Vatican Council, and maintain that, on the contrary, they are the fiercest defenders of this doctrine, since they teach that the Apostolic See of Peter, under the rule of a true Pope, cannot promulgate contradictory teachings. They argue that the Dogmatic Constitution Pastor æternus concerns the permanence of the primacy of the Holy See over the universal church and condemns as heretical the propositions that the authority granted to St. Peter by Christ either was abolished after his death or devolved to the college of bishops, both positions that were argued by Orthodox theologians. The very purpose of the Constitution was to solemnly and dogmatically refute those errors. The perpetuity granted divinely to the Petrine ministry was not the constant occupation of that office but that the monarchical structure of the Church, with the Seat of Peter as its head, would never be abrogated and endure throughout history. It is this permanence which allows the Holy See to function as the point of unity even during papal interregnum. To rebut the accusation of denying the catholicity and indefectibility of the Church, they say that, between the death of every Pope and the election of his successor, there is a sede vacante period during which there is no visible Head of the Church, and  — while mainstream Catholics hold that, according to the dogmatic constitution Pastor aeternus of the First Vatican Council, which speaks of &quot; perpetual successors &quot; in the pontificate, there must be, apart from such transitory periods, a perpetual presence of the Bishop of Rome, not merely of his office  — that the absence of a Pope has become a long-term feature of the Church&apos;s structure. They recall that, during the 40-year Great Western Schism, while nobody claimed that the see of Rome was vacant, there was uncertainty about which of the two (eventually three) claimants was the true pontiff, with even canonized saints taking opposing sides in the controversy. In his 1882 book, The Relations of the Church to Society  — Theological Essays, the Jesuit theologian, Father Edmund James O&apos;Reilly, wrote: &quot;... not that an interregnum covering the whole period would have been impossible or inconsistent with the promises of Christ, for this is by no means manifest. &quot; They say that they primarily base their claim of the empty Apostolic See on &quot; proven &quot; denial of Catholic dogma by post-1958 or post-1963 Popes, and only secondarily on the thence originating changes in discipline and liturgy. They interpret the Book of Revelation as speaking of an end-times Great Apostasy on the City of Seven Hills (Rome) and say that Our Lady of La Salette warned on 19 September 1846 that Rome would lose the faith and become the seat of the Antichrist. Like other traditionalist Catholics, sedevacantists criticize liturgical revisions made by the Holy See since the Second Vatican Council. Anthony Cekada, an assistant pastor of sedevacantist bishop Daniel Dolan, St. Gertrude the Great in his book Work of Human Hands, says that the Mass of Paul VI is invalid and moreover strips down or removes completely every prayer in the Latin Rite which covers subjects considered troubling and objectionable to modern man, such as judgment, Divine judgment is in fact repeatedly stressed as in the priest&apos;s Perceptio prayer before communion, in the solemn blessing on the Feast of the Ascension, in the Universal Prayer of Pope Clement XI, in the first Preface of the Passion. heaven Ignoring the direct quotations from Scripture, which in the revised Missal are placed in Lectionary, there are more than twice as many mentions of &quot; heaven &quot; and &quot; heavenly &quot; as in the 1962 Missal and hell, as in the 1962 Missal, hell is mentioned only in passages of Scripture and in the Prayer of Pope Clement XI the devil, and so forth, and suggests that their full-scale removal, if such were to happen, would contribute to a lack of self-discipline and eventual loss of faith and skepticism among Catholics, responding to the post hoc ergo propter hoc accusation above. He also criticizes the Mass of Paul VI for what he calls its Protestantizations, such as its referring to the service as a &quot; supper &quot; The phrase &quot; Mass or Lord&apos;s Supper &quot; is used exactly twice in the revised Missal: GIRM 17 and 27 with a &quot; table &quot; The phrase &quot; the altar or the table of the Lord &quot; is used once (GIRM 73), immediately after using the word &quot; altar &quot; on its own; &quot; the eucharistic table &quot; is used in GIRM 73 in the same sense as that in which the 1962 Missal used &quot; table &quot; in, for instance, the Code of Rubrics, 528 and &quot; cup &quot; The revised Missal uses the word &quot; calix &quot;, which in the official English translation appears as &quot; chalice &quot;, not as &quot; cup &quot; instead of a &quot; sacrifice &quot; The word &quot; sacrifice &quot; appears 215 times in the revised Missal with an &quot; altar &quot; The word &quot; altar &quot; appear 345 times in the revised Missal and &quot; chalice &quot;, The word &quot; chalice &quot; appears 177 times in the revised Missal making the congregation, in his view, the center of worship instead of God, and so forth. He claims that the Mass of Paul VI uses a Modernist method of mixing traditional language with Protestant language to appeal to both sides, and thus falling into heresy, in the same way the Church of England is &quot; both Catholic and Reformed &quot;. The observation about the use of the word &quot; cup &quot;, rather than &quot; chalice &quot;, concerned only the English translation in use from 1973 to 2011, which employed both terms. For instance, the 1973 English translation had, immediately after the consecration, &quot; He (the priest) shows the chalice to the people, places it on the corporal, and genuflects in adoration. &quot; It does not concern the original Latin text of the Mass of Paul VI, translations into other languages, or the present English translation, which always uses the word &quot; chalice &quot;. Cekada, Patrick Henry Omlor, and Rama Coomaraswamy have criticized what they call the wholescale removal of prayers and revisions to the consecration of the Eucharist. Omlor objected to pro vobis et pro multis being translated as &quot; for you and for all &quot;, instead of &quot; for you and for many &quot;, as in the present English translation. On this see pro multis. They have also said that the revision of the wine consecration invalidates the sacrament by, for example, moving the mysterium fidei (In the Engllish translation, &quot; the mystery of faith &quot; ), from the middle of the consecration to afterwards, thus changing its context. They claim that the new rites of ordination and consecration are invalid, for not explicitly imbuing the priest with the power to &quot; offer Mass for the living and the dead &quot;, but simply &quot; to preside over the assembly of the people &quot;, among other things. Consequently, they regard Catholic priests ordained or consecrated as bishops in the new rite since 1968, when it came into use, as invalid. Thus they consider Pope Benedict XVI to be a mere priest, who cannot be the Bishop of Rome. Kevin Vaillancourt, &quot; On the new ordination rite: the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass is not the only sacred rite changed since Vatican II &quot; [ Groups ] The Holy Catholic Mercedarian Church. The Holy Catholic Mercedarian Church Most Holy Family Monastery, a sedevacantist community living in Fillmore, New York, under the headship of Michael (official name Frederick) Dimond. Only Michael and his biological brother Peter (official name Robert) Dimond write the contents of the website. Most Holy Family Monastery Society of St. Pius V, formed when nine priests of the Society of St. Pius X split from that organization over a number of issues including using the liturgical reforms implemented under Pope John XXIII. A more comprehensive list of objections can be found at http://www.traditionalmass.org/articles/article.php?id=48 &amp; catname=12 The SSPV maintains that much of the hierarchy of the Roman Catholic Church no longer adheres to the Catholic faith but instead profess a new, or Conciliar religion. They regard the question of the legitimacy of the present hierarchy and the possibility that the Holy See is unoccupied to be unresolved. The SSPV does not impose sedevacantism as a morally binding teaching. &quot; A Statement of Principles in a Time of Crisis, &quot; The Roman Catholic Association, Inc., (1988): http://www.stpiusvchapel.org/flash_paper/articles/003_declaration_principles.swf The Pierre Martin Ngô Đình Thục lines of episcopal succession Catholic Restoration, consisting of the founding members—dissenters from SSPV -- ( Anthony Cekada, Daniel Dolan, Donald Sanborn ), together with newer priests who were trained in their seminary. Congregation of Mary Immaculate Queen The Society of the Immaculata, founded by Dennis McCormack The Society of the Immaculata Apostles of Infinite Love, founded by Michel Collin (actually conclavist ). [ See also ] Conclavism Traditionalist Catholic Tridentine Mass Second Vatican Council Mass of Paul VI Sirianism [ References ] [ External links ] [ Sedevacantist sites ] Sedevacante International European Sodalitium Pianum Sedevacantist European Seminary Sedevacantism Reconsidered Evidence of sedevacantism The Aquinas site. Sedevacantist.com. Defense of Sedevacantism Fr Raphael Trytek Eclipse of the Church WFTS radio SSPV sermons, lectures, music SSPV Most Holy Family Monastery The Society of the Immaculata Traditional Catholic network list of sites [ Criticism ] Critique of sedevacantism by the SSPX Is that Chair Vacant? A dossier on sedevacantism by the Society of St. Pius X of Canada. Sedevacantism refuted by bishop Terence Fulham (broken link) Against Sedevacantism. Discussion with the Dimond Brothers. By Robert Sungenis The insanity of sedevacantism by Robert Sungenis. White smoke? Valid Pope by Father Brian Harrison Do-It-Yourself Popes: the Wacky World of Sedevacantists (concerning strict sedevacantists as well as conclavists) A Refutation of the Heresy of Sedevacantism by I. Shawn McElhinney. Kelopi.net Refutations [ March 2011 ] Category:Integrism Category:Schisms in Christianity * Category:Catholic terms be:Седзевакантызм bg:Седевакантизъм cs:Seznam sedisvakantistických papežů de:Sedisvakantismus es:Sedevacantismo fr:Sédévacantisme it:Sedevacantismo la:Sedevacantismus nl:Sedisvacantisme no:Sedevacantisme nn:Sedevacantisme pl:Sedewakantyzm pt:Sedevacantismo ru:Седевакантизм sr:Седевакантизам fi:Sedevakantismi sv:Sedevakantister uk:Седевакантизм zh:宗座缺出论