[ CSX the parent company CSX Corporation ] [ 21000 mi on ] { Eastern United States, Southwestern } { Ontario, and southwestern } { Quebec } { 1986 } { present } { Jacksonville, Florida } CSX Transportation [ CSXT ] is a Class I railroad in the United States. It is the main subsidiary of the CSX Corporation. The company is headquartered in Jacksonville, Florida, and owns approximately 21,000 route miles. { CSX.com } CSX operates one of the three Class I railroads serving most of the East Coast, the other two being the Norfolk Southern Railway and Canadian Pacific Railway. This railroad also serves the Canadian provinces of Ontario and Quebec. [ History ] [ List of CSX Transportation predecessor railroads ] { Jacksonville, Florida, with the } { Florida East Coast Railway bridge in the background } CSX Transportation was formed on July 1, 1986, as a combining and renaming of the Chessie System, Inc. and Seaboard System Railroad into one entity. The originator of the Seaboard System was the former Seaboard Air Line Railroad, which previously merged Atlantic Coast Line Railroad, and later Louisville and Nashville Railroad, as well as several smaller subsidiaries. On August 31, 1987, the Chesapeake and Ohio Railway, which had absorbed the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad on April 30 of that year, merged into CSX. The merger had been started in 1986 with the merger of Chessie System and Seaboard Coast Line Industries to form the CSX Corporation. On June 23, 1997, CSX Transportation and Norfolk Southern filed a joint application with the Surface Transportation Board for authority to purchase, divide and operate the assets of the 11,000-mile Consolidated Rail Corporation (Conrail), which had been created in 1976 by bringing together several ailing Northeastern railway systems into a government-owned corporation. On June 6, 1998, the STB approved the CSX–NS application and set August 22, 1998, as the effective date of its decision. CSX acquired 42% of Conrail&apos;s assets, and NS received the remaining 58%.As a result of the transaction, CSX&apos;s rail operations grew to include some 3,800 miles of the Conrail system (predominantly lines that had belonged to the former New York Central Railroad ). CSX began operating its trains on its portion of the Conrail network on June 1, 1999. CSX now serves much of the eastern U.S., with a few routes into nearby Canadian cities. { CSX Corporation, emphasizing the &quot; multiplication symbol &quot; X } The name came about during merger talks between Chessie System, Inc. and Seaboard System Railroad, Inc., commonly called Chessie and Seaboard. The company chairmen said it was important for the new name to include neither of those names because it was a partnership. Employees were asked for suggestions, most of which consisted of combinations of the initials. At the same time a temporary shorthand name was needed for discussions with the Interstate Commerce Commission. CSC was chosen but belonged to a trucking company in Virginia. CSM (for Chessie-Seaboard Merger) was also taken. The lawyers decided to use CSX, and the name stuck. In the public announcement, it was said that &quot; CSX is singularly appropriate. C can stand for Chessie, S for Seaboard, and X, which actually has no meaning. But the X could be used as a short term for the word &quot; Express &quot; taking off the &quot; E &quot; giving out &quot; Xpress &quot;, putting the X in use. &quot; The T had to be added to CSX when used as a reporting mark because reporting marks that end in X means that the car is owned by a leasing company or private car owner. Its current slogan, &quot; How Tomorrow Moves &quot;, appeared in 2009. [ http://www.trains.com/trn/default.aspx?c%3Da%26amp%3Bid%3D274 Dolinger, Milt How CSX got its name Trains magazine online 2006-05-01 ] [ CSX divisions ] CSX operates two regions of five divisions each: the Northern, based in Calumet City, Illinois, and Southern, based in Jacksonville, Florida. CSX rail tunnel at Harper&apos;s Ferry, in the Baltimore Division. { Clearwater, } { Florida, in the Jacksonville Division. } Northern Region Divisions Great Lakes Division – Based in Indianapolis, IN Chicago Division – Based in Calumet City, IL Albany Division – Based in Selkirk, NY Baltimore Division – Based in Baltimore, MD Louisville Division – Based in Cincinnati, OH There are two lines in the Northern Region that travels into Canada: Sarnia Subdivision (Chicago Division) from Chatham, Ontario to Sarnia, Ontario, then across the border to Port Huron subdivision via Port Huron, Michigan. Montreal Subdivision (Albany Division) from Kahnawake, Quebec to Massena, New York Southern Region Divisions Atlanta Division – Based in Atlanta, GA Appalachian Division – Based in Huntington, WV Nashville Division – Based in Nashville, TN Florence Division – Based in Florence, SC Jacksonville Division – Based in Jacksonville, FL (At Dufford Center) [ Unit trains ] CSX operates the Juice Train, train numbers Q740 and Q741, a notable unit train of Tropicana fresh orange juice between Bradenton, Florida, and distribution centers in the Greenville section of Jersey City, New Jersey and Cincinnati, Ohio in the United States. In the 21st century, CSX Juice Trains have been the focus of efficiency studies and have received awards. They are considered good examples of how modern rail transportation can compete successfully with trucking and other modes to carry perishable products. Coke Express trains run between Pittsburgh and Chicago, and other places in the rust belt, carrying coke to industries, mainly steel mills. CSX also runs daily trash trains out from New York City, bound for Florida, train numbers Q706/Q707 and Q702/Q703. These trains usually consist of about 50 cars with four 20 foot containers of trash on each. Another style of unit train is a local trash train, D765, runs between Derwood and Dickerson, both in Maryland. The train runs daily except Sunday, sometimes twice a day around holidays. Trash is carried from Montgomery County &apos;s Shady Grove Transfer Station to a waste-to-energy plant located off the PEPCO lead to Mirant &apos;s Dickerson Generating Station. The trip is roughly [ 17 mi km ], and the train is made up of National Steel Car Company-built well cars, hauling 40 foot containers. The first NEMX equipment was built when the D765 first started operations in 1997. In recent years, the fleet has been somewhat upgraded, repainted, and some entirely new cars have been constructed. In the early days, the locomotives powering the train were a GP40-2/RDMT slug set, but the train has since grown to roughly 40 cars. The locomotives that now routinely power the train are a pair of EMD SD50 s. CSX, in cooperation with the Union Pacific, runs an extended haul perishables train, Q090; known by the railroad as the &quot; Apple Train &quot; or &quot; Salad Shooter &quot;, from Wallula to Schenectady. This train typically runs with 3 of Union Pacific&apos;s newest locomotives and has its extended haul inspection from Wallula to Schenectady at Cleveland – Collinwood Yard on CSX headed in both directions, but on the return trip the train is labeled as a Q091. CSX Train Handling rule book is modified specially for this train to allow use of more power axles. [ Air Brake and Train Handling Rules CSX Transportation October 2007 Rule 5502-A-4 Section 4, Page 1 2009-06-13 ] [ Locomotives ] CSXT SD40-2 8449, seen in Senatobia, Mississippi, on former IC rails pulling an auto train, is showing off the YN3 Paint, also known as the &quot; dark future &quot; paint scheme. { GE ES44DC in the CSX scheme crosses a } { diamond in Marion, Ohio. } CSX currently uses a blue and gold paint scheme for its locomotives. Former CR locomotives can be spotted by recognizing phase differences in engine models and numbering. Other spotting details can be inconsistent, but can include a number of the following: Class lights, Leslie model RS3L air horns, former Conrail SD40-2s ride on Flexicoil &quot; C &quot; trucks and have anticlimbers, ditch lights mounted beneath the anticlimber, headlights above the cab (vs. CSX&apos;s standard practice of nose mounted headlights on all wide nose GE units), and modified &quot; Bright Future &quot; paint with battery box faces painted yellow versus black or blue. There are no Conrail locomotives in active service with CSX at this time. CSX has created a new paint scheme, known as YN3, which debuted in 2002 on EMD SD50 8503, { http://www.trainweb.org/csxphotos/photos/SD50/8503CSX-yn3.jpg } now downgraded to an SD50-2. Currently, CSX has over 1000 YN3-painted locomotives and are continuing to paint their locomotives in YN3. The vast majority of CSX locomotives today have flashing ditch lights. CSX has also obtained a few EMD F40PH s that were retired from Amtrak service. An AC6000CW leads a coal train through the New River Gorge in West Virginia. A former Seaboard System B36-7 converted into an RCPHG4, which serves as a remotely controlled unit. A CSX C40-8 in the YN2 &quot; Bright Future &quot; color scheme rests inside a railroad yard in Florida. [ Runaway train ] [ CSX 8888 incident ] A CSX train, led by CSX Transportation SD40-2 #8888, left its Walbridge, Ohio, rail yard in 2001 and began a [ 66 mi on ] journey through northwest Ohio with no one at the controls. Its engineer had gotten out of the originally slow-moving train to correctly line a switch, mistakenly believing he had properly set the train&apos;s dynamic braking system. Two of the train&apos;s tank cars also contained thousands of gallons of molten phenol, an ingredient of paints and dyes, that is toxic when inhaled, ingested, or contacted with the skin. Attempts to derail CSX 8888 using a portable derailer failed, and police were unable to shoot out the Emergency Fuel Cut-Off Switch, instead hitting the fuel cap. For two hours, the train traveled along at speeds up to [ 47 mph ] until the crew of a second train coupled onto the runaway and slowly applied its brakes. Once the runaway was slowed down to a speed of 11 miles per hour, a CSX employee, trainmaster Jon Hosfeld, ran alongside the train and climbed aboard, shutting down the locomotive. The train was stopped just southeast of Kenton, Ohio. [ http://kohlin.com/CSX8888/z-final-report.htm CSX 8888 – The Final Report November 13, 2010 ] The CSX 8888 incident inspired the 2010 movie Unstoppable, which borrowed some elements from the actual event for its plot. [ Currently operating rail yards ] CSX operates a number of large classification yard s around the system that include &quot; hump yard &quot; operations. Trains are slowly pushed over a small manmade hill as cars are uncoupled at the crest of the hill and allowed to roll down the hump into the appropriate tracks for outbound trains. These are located at: Hump Yards (12) Atlanta, Georgia – Tilford Yard Avon, Indiana – Avon Yard Birmingham, Alabama – Boyles Yard Cincinnati, Ohio – Queensgate Yard Cumberland, Maryland – Cumberland West Hump (East Hump shut down) Hamlet, North Carolina – Hamlet Yard Louisville, Kentucky – Osborn Yard (for Prime F. Osborn former President of CSX) Nashville, Tennessee – Radnor Yard Selkirk, New York – Selkirk Yard Toledo, Ohio – Stanley Yard Waycross, Georgia – Rice Yard Willard, Ohio – Willard Yard (Double Hump, Eastbound and Westbound) Other Yards: Baltimore, Maryland – Curtis Bay Yard, Locust Point Yard, Bayview Yard, Penn Mary Yard, Mt. Clare A Yard, Mt. Winans Yard, Grays Yard Chicago, Illinois – Barr Yard Dearborn, Michigan – Rougemere Yard Russell, Kentucky – Russell Yard Cleveland, Ohio – Collinwood Yard and Clark Ave. Yard Bronx, New York - Oak Point Yard Buffalo, New York – Frontier Yard Newark, New Jersey – Oak Island Yard, shared with Norfolk Southern North Bergen, New Jersey - North Bergen Yard North Haven, Connecticut – Cedar Hill Yard Framingham, Massachusetts – Nevins Yard Watertown, New York – Massey Yard Syracuse, New York – DeWitt Yard Wilmington, Delaware – Wilsmere Yard Richmond, Virginia – Acca Yard and Fulton Yard Charleston, South Carolina – Bennett Yard Charlotte, North Carolina – Pinoca Yard Spartanburg, South Carolina – Maxwell Yard Columbia, South Carolina – Cayce Yard Savannah, Georgia – Southover Yard Columbus, Ohio – Parsons Yard Dayton, Ohio – Needmore Yard Middletown, Ohio – North Excello Yard Hamilton, Ohio – New River Yard Toledo, Ohio – Walbridge Yard North Baltimore, Ohio – Northwest Ohio Intermodal Terminal Rochester, New York – Goodman Street Yard Evansville, Indiana – Howell Yard New Castle, Pennsylvania - New Castle Yard Akron, Ohio - Akron &quot; Hill &quot; Yard Lordstown, Ohio - Goodman Yard (Lordstown) [ See also ] [ Trains Railways Companies ] CSX 8888 incident CSX milepost prefixes History of railroads in Michigan List of CSX Transportation lines List of CSX Transportation predecessor railroads Railex [ References ] [ External links ] [ CSX Transportation ] CSX official website CSX History CSX Dispatcher code cross-reference table Railex the refrigerated Unit Train in partnership with CSX Category:Railway companies established in 1986 Category:Companies based in Jacksonville, Florida Category:Class I railroads in North America Category:Alabama railroads Category:Connecticut railroads Category:Delaware railroads Category:Washington, D.C. railroads Category:Florida railroads Category:Georgia (U.S. state) railroads Category:Indiana railroads Category:Kentucky railroads Category:Louisiana railroads Category:Maryland railroads Category:Massachusetts railroads Category:Michigan railroads Category:Mississippi railroads Category:Missouri railroads Category:New Jersey railroads Category:New York railroads Category:North Carolina railroads Category:Ohio railroads Category:Ontario railways Category:Pennsylvania railroads Category:Quebec railways Category:South Carolina railroads Category:Tennessee railroads Category:Virginia railroads Category:West Virginia railroads Category:Railroads in the Chicago Switching District Category:Companies operating former Grand Trunk Railway lines Category:Companies operating former Central Railroad of New Jersey lines Category:Companies operating former Chicago and Eastern Illinois Railroad lines Category:Companies operating former Chicago, Rock Island and Pacific Railroad lines Category:Companies operating former Delaware, Lackawanna and Western Railroad lines Category:Companies operating former Erie Railroad lines Category:Companies operating former Gulf, Mobile and Ohio Railroad lines Category:Companies operating former Illinois Central Railroad lines Category:Companies operating former Lehigh Valley Railroad lines Category:Companies operating former New York Central Railroad lines Category:Companies operating former New York, New Haven and Hartford Railroad lines Category:Companies operating former Pennsylvania Railroad lines Category:Companies operating former Pennsylvania-Reading Seashore Lines lines Category:Companies operating former Reading Company lines da:CSX Transportation de:CSX Transportation fr:CSX Transportation ko:CSX 교통 it:CSX Transportation nl:CSX Transportation ja:CSXトランスポーテーション pt:CSX Transportation ru:CSX Transportation sl:CSX Transportation fi:CSX Transportation