[ October 2009 ] [ San Gimignano Comune di San Gimignano San Gimignano.JPG View of the town from nearby hill San Gimignano-Stemma.png 43.468 11.042 title Tuscany Siena (SI) Democratic Party Giacomo Bassi 138 7,105 December 31, 2005 Sangimignanesi 324 St. Geminianus Saint Fina 53037 0577 ] [ Historic Centre of San Gimignano 250px Italy Cultural i, iii, iv 550 Europe and North America 1990 14th http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/550 ] San Gimignano is a small walled medieval hill town in the province of Siena, Tuscany, north-central Italy. It is mainly famous for its medieval architecture, especially its towers, which may be seen from several kilometres outside the town. The town also is known for the white wine, Vernaccia di San Gimignano, produced from the Vernaccia grape which is grown in the area. [ History ] San Gimignano was founded as a small village in the 3rd century BC by the Etruscans. Historical records begin in the 10th century, when it adopted the name of the bishop Saint Geminianus, who had defended it from Attila&apos;s Huns. In the Middle Ages and Renaissance era, it was a stopping point for Catholic pilgrim s on their way to Rome and the Vatican, as it sits on the medieval Via Francigena. The city&apos;s development also was improved by the trade of agricultural products from the fertile neighbouring hills. In 1199, during the period of its highest splendour, the city made itself independent from the bishops of Volterra. Divisions between Guelphs and Ghibellines troubled the inner life of the commune, which nonetheless, still managed to embellish itself with artworks and architectures. Saint Fina, known also as Seraphina and Serafina, was a 13th century Italian saint born in San Gimignano during 1238. Since Saint Fina died on March 12, 1253 her feast day became March 12. Her major shrine is in San Gimignano and the house said to be her home still stands in the town. On May 8, 1300, San Gimignano hosted Dante Alighieri in his role of ambassador of the Guelph League in Tuscany. [ October 2009 ] The city flourished until 1348, when the Black Death that affected all of Europe compelled it to submit to Florence. San Gimignano became a secondary centre until the 19th century, when its status as a touristic and artistic resort began to be recognised. [ Main sights ] While in other cities, such as Bologna or Florence, most or all of their towers have been brought down due to wars, catastrophes, or urban renewal, San Gimignano has managed to conserve fourteen towers of varying height which have become its international symbol. There are many churches in the town: the two main ones are the Collegiata, formerly a cathedral, and Sant&apos;Agostino, housing a wide representation of artworks from some of the main Italian renaissance artists. The Communal Palace, once seat of the podestà, is currently home of the town gallery, with works by Pinturicchio, Benozzo Gozzoli, Filippino Lippi, Domenico di Michelino, Pier Francesco Fiorentino and others. From Dante&apos;s Hall in the palace, access may be made to a Majesty fresco by Lippo Memmi, as well as the Torre del Podestà or Torre Grossa, 1311, which stands fifty-four metres high. The heart of the town contains the four squares, the Piazza della Cisterna, the Piazza Duomo where the Collegiata is located, the Piazza Pecori and the Piazza delle Erbe. The main streets are Via San Matteo and Via San Giovanni, which cross the city from north to south. [ Culture ] San Gimignano is the birthplace of the poet Folgore da San Gimignano (1270–1332). A fictionalised version of San Gimignano is featured in E. M. Forster &apos;s 1905 novel, Where Angels Fear to Tread as Monteriano. Tea with Mussolini, a 1999 drama about the plight of English and American expatriate women in Italy during World War II, was filmed in part at San Gimignano. The frescoes that the women save from being destroyed during the German Army&apos;s withdrawal are inside the Duomo, the town&apos;s main church. Franco Zeffirelli used San Gimignano as a stand-in for the town of Assisi in his 1972 St. Francis of Assisi biopic Brother Sun, Sister Moon. Most of the &quot; Assisi &quot; scenes were filmed here. In the novel The Broker by John Grisham, Joel Backman takes his second of three wives on vacation in Italy to keep her from divorcing him. They rent a 14th century monastery near San Gimignano for a month. M. C. Escher &apos;s 1923 woodcut, &apos;&apos;San Gimignano&apos;&apos;, depicts the celebrated towers. 15th century San Gimignano may be explored in the video game Assassin&apos;s Creed II. Located in the heart of the city, the museum SanGimignano1300 offers a massive reconstruction of the city as it existed 700 years ago. Architects, historians, and a team of artists worked nearly 3 years to create this spectacular and unprecedented exhibition. This exhibit includes 800 meticulously handcrafted structures, 72 towers, street scenes, and figurines. [ International relations ] [ List of twin towns and sister cities in Italy ] [ Twin towns ] [ GER ] [ GEO ] [ http://newsgeorgia.ru/politics/20111003/214212464.html Грузинский курорт Местиа и итальянский Сан-Джиминьяно станут побратимами &amp; #124; Политика &amp; #124; Новости-Грузия Newsgeorgia.ru 2011-11-07 ] Meersburg, Germany Mestia, Georgia [ Notes ] [ External links ] San Gimignano - The town of the beautiful towers A Walk in San Gimignano Tourist information http://www.sangimignano1300.com Video Introduction to San Gimignano San Gimignano virtual tour (Italian Landmarks) Category:Cities and towns in Tuscany Category:Hilltowns in Tuscany Category:Towers in Italy Category:Wine regions of Italy Category:World Heritage Sites in Italy ar:سان جيمنيانو (قرية) be-x-old:Сан-Джыміньяна bcl:San Gimignano bg:Сан Джиминяно ca:San Gimignano cs:San Gimignano co:San Gimignano cy:San Gimignano da:San Gimignano de:San Gimignano el:Σαν Τζιμινιάνο es:San Gimignano eo:San Gimignano fr:San Gimignano hr:San Gimignano id:San Gimignano os:Сан-Джиминьяно it:San Gimignano he:סן ג&apos;ימיניאנו ka:სან-ჯიმინიანო la:Fanum Sancti Geminiani lt:San Džiminjanas lmo:San Gimignano hu:San Gimignano nl:San Gimignano ja:サン・ジミニャーノ nap:San Gimignano no:San Gimignano pms:San Gimignano pl:San Gimignano pt:San Gimignano ro:San Gimignano ru:Сан-Джиминьяно scn:San Gimignanu simple:San Gimignano sk:San Gimignano sr:Сан Ђимињано sh:San Gimignano fi:San Gimignano sv:San Gimignano roa-tara:San Gimignano th:ซานจีมิญญาโน tr:San Gimignano uk:Сан-Джиміньяно vec:San Gimignan vi:San Gimignano vo:San Gimignano war:San Gimignano zh:圣吉米尼亚诺