[ Richard Grenville ] [ January 2010 ] [ Sir Richard Grenville (6 June 1542 10 September 1591) Sir Richard Grenville from NPG.jpg A 16th-century portrait of Sir Richard Grenville in the National Portrait Gallery. Explorer Sailor Buckland Abbey, Devon, England off Flores, Azores Islands England Admiral Revenge Second Desmond Rebellion Anglo–Spanish War (1585) Battle of Gravelines Battle of Flores (1591) ] Sir Richard Grenville (6 June 1542 – 10 September 1591) (sp. var: Greynvile, Greeneville or Greenfield) was an English sailor, sea captain and explorer. He took part in the early English attempts to settle the New World, and also participated in the fight against the Spanish Armada. He died in 1591 at the Battle of Flores, characteristically fighting against overwhelming odds, and refusing to surrender his ship to the far more numerous Spanish. He was the grandfather of Sir Richard Grenville, of English Civil War fame. [ Early life ] Grenville&apos;s birthplace is unknown, but he spent much of his childhood at Clifton Arundell House after his mother remarried Thomas Arundell following the death of his father Sir Roger Grenville, who was Captain of the Mary Rose when it sank in Portsmouth Harbour in 1545. He was a cousin of Sir Walter Raleigh and the privateer Sir Francis Drake.At age 17, Grenville began law studies at the Inner Temple. On 19 November 1562, he was in an affray in the Strand in which he ran Robert Bannister through with his sword and left him to die. [ http://www.berkshirehistory.com/bios/euntonsr.html Sir Edward Unton (1534-1582) Ford, David Nash 2010 Royal Berkshire History Nash Ford Publishing 15 November 2010 ] He was pardoned for this crime.At age 18 he inherited his estates at Stowe in Cornwall, and Bideford and Buckland Abbey in Devon, England. This year he was also made Member of Parliament for Launceston.In 1565 Grenville married Mary St Leger (who outlived Grenville, dying aged about 80 on 9 November 1623. She lies buried at St Mary&apos;s Church, Bideford.) The family initially lived at Buckland Abbey before moving to a newly built house at Bideford. [ Career ] In pursuit of his military career, Grenville fought against the Turks in Hungary in 1566. In 1569, he arrived in Ireland with Sir Warham St. Leger to arrange for the settlement of lands in the barony of Kerricurrihy. These had been mortgaged [ November 2011 ] to St Leger by the Earl of Desmond. At about this time, Grenville also seized lands for colonisation at Tracton, to the west of Cork harbour. Sir Peter Carew had asserted his claim to lands in south Leinster. St Leger settled nearby, and Humphrey Gilbert pushed westward from Idrone along the Blackwater River. All of these English efforts to take over land in the south of Ireland led to bitter disputes. They escalated into the first of the Desmond rebellions, led by James Fitzmaurice Fitzgerald. As sheriff of Cork, Grenville witnessed the rebellion in which Fitzmaurice, along with the Earl of Clancar, James Fitzedmund Fitzgerald (the Seneschal of Imokilly ); Edmund Fitzgibbon (the White Knight); and others, attacked Tracton. They overcame the English defence with pickaxes and killed nearly the entire garrison. The three surviving English soldiers were hanged the next day by the Irish. Fitzmaurice threatened the imminent arrival of Spanish forces. Having robbed the citizens of Cork, he boasted that he could also take the artillery of the city of Youghal. In June 1569, soon after Grenville&apos;s sailing for England, Fitzmaurice camped outside the walls of Waterford and demanded that Grenville&apos;s wife and Lady St Leger be given over to him, along with all the English and all prisoners; the citizens refused. His forces put local English farmers to the sword. As Cork ran low on provisions, the people of Youghal expected an attack at any minute. The rebellion continued, but Grenville remained in England.Grenville sided with the Earl of Arundel and the Duke of Norfolk in 1569 against the Queen&apos;s secretary. &quot; Undeviatingly Protestant &quot;, he arrested the Catholic priest Cuthbert Mayne at the home of the Tregians in 1577. Mayne was martyred as a result. During this period Grenville played a major role in the transformation of the small fishing port of Bideford in north Devon into a significant trading centre. A Charter had been granted to a former Richard Grenville in 1272, creating the Town&apos;s first Council. In 1575 he created the Port of Bideford. Richard Grenville Grenville was never elected as Mayor of Bideford, preferring instead to support John Salterne in that role, but he was Lord of the Manor, a title held by the Grenville&apos;s since 1126 and finally ceded to the Town Council Richard Grenville created, in 1711. He was also High Sheriff of Cornwall in 1577. Following a period of supporting Sir Walter Raleigh&apos;s venture in America (see below) he returned to Munster to arrange the estate granted him under the plantation of the province. Following the suppression of the Second Desmond Rebellion in 1583, he had purchased some 24,000 acres (97  km²) in Kinalmeaky and brought settlers over. His renewed efforts beginning in 1588 yielded little success, and Grenville returned to England late in 1590. [ New World and the Spanish Armada ] [ Roanoke Colony ] In 1574 Grenville submitted a proposal to the Privy Council to take a single ship to plunder Spanish treasure ships in South America and from there to sail across the &apos;South Sea&apos; (The Pacific Ocean ) in the hope of finding a short cut to the Spice Islands. He was denied on the grounds that England was still using diplomacy with Spain. It was this plan that was eventually executed by Sir Francis Drake when he circumnavigate d the world in 1577. In 1585, Grenville was admiral of the seven-strong fleet that brought English settlers to establish a military colony on Roanoke Island, off the coast of modern North Carolina in North America. He was heavily criticised by Ralph Lane, General of the expedition, who referred to Grenville&apos;s &quot; intolerable pride and unsatiable ambition &quot;. This description has remained of Grenville to this day but must be considered with the knowledge that Lane was involved in a bitter legal feud with Grenville at the time.On his return, Grenville took a Spanish Ship, the &apos;Santa Maria de Vincenze&apos;, which he later brought to Bideford to be converted into the &apos;Galleon Dudley&apos;. The cannons from that Spanish ship are thought to be those erroneously labelled &apos;Armada cannons&apos; in Bideford&apos;s Victoria Park. In 1586 Grenville returned to Roanoke to find that the surviving colonists had shipped out with Drake. Grenville left 15 of his own men to defend Raleigh&apos;s New World territory. During his return to England, Grenville raided various towns in the Azores Islands. At about this time, a description was given of his behaviour while dining with Spanish captains: &quot; He would carouse three or four glasses of wine, and in a bravery take the glasses between his teeth and crash them in pieces and swallow them down, so that often the blood ran out of his mouth without any harm at all unto him. &quot;, { &quot; Revenge &quot; } Tudor History In 1587 he was asked by the Privy Council to organize the defences of Devon and Cornwall in preparation for the expected attack by the Spanish Armada the following year.In 1588, Grenville equipped seven ships at Bideford with supplies and more Colonists for Raleigh&apos;s &apos;Planters&apos; Colony settled at Roanoke the previous year. However, a stay of shipping due to the impending arrival of the Spanish Armada meant that the fleet did not sail. Grenville led five of these ships to Plymouth to join the English defence and returned to Bideford where he provisioned the remaining two ships for Roanoke. A voyage that later turned back after being raided by the French.Later that year, Grenville was commissioned to keep watch at sea on the Western approaches to the Bristol Channel in case the Spanish Armada returned. [ Final command and death ] [ Battle of Flores (1591) ] Grenville&apos;s defence of the &apos;&apos;Revenge&apos;&apos; at the Battle of Flores Grenville was appointed vice-admiral of the fleet under Thomas Howard. He was charged with maintaining a squadron at the Azores to waylay the treasure fleets of the Spanish. He took command of Revenge, a galleon considered to be a masterpiece of naval construction. At Flores, the English fleet was surprised by a much larger squadron sent by Philip II of Spain. Howard retreated to safety, but Grenville faced the 53 enemy ships alone, leading his single ship in what amounted to a suicide mission, saying that he &quot; utterly refused to turn from the enimie...he would rather chose to die than to dishonour himselfe &quot;. { Milton, p.271 } His crew was down by nearly 100 men because of sickness on shore, but he chose nonetheless to confront the far superior Spanish force. For 12 hours he and his crew fought off the Spanish, causing heavy damage to fifteen galleons. According to Raleigh&apos;s account, Grenville and his soldiers fought for hour after hour: &quot; until all the powder of The Revenge, to the last barrell, was now spent, all her pikes broken, fortie of her best men slain, and the most part of the rest hurt &quot;. The ship itself was &quot; marvellous unsaverie, filled with bloud and bodies of deade and wounded men like a slaughter house &quot;. The fight was later romanticized by the poet Alfred Lord Tennyson : &quot; Out-gunned, out-fought, and out-numbered fifty-three to one &quot;, { The Revenge: A Ballad of the Fleet by } { Lord Tennyson } Grenville was said to have wished to blow up his ship rather than give up the fight: &quot; Sink me the ship, Master Gunner—sink her, split her in twain!... Fall into the hands of God, not into the hands of Spain! &quot;, wrote Tennyson. His crew however refused to obey these orders and his officers duly surrendered what was left of their vessel to the Spanish, on a promise of fair treatment. Grenville died of his wounds several days later, screaming that his men were &quot; traitors and dogs &quot;, { Milton, p.272 } but the Spanish were not to enjoy their success, nor would Grenville&apos;s men survive their deliverance. The Spanish fleet was caught by a cyclone soon after; during a week-long storm Revenge and 15  Spanish warships and merchant vessels were lost. { Paine p. 150 } Revenge sank with her mixed prize-crew of 70  Spaniards and English prisoners near the island of Terceira, at the approximate position [ 38 46 9 N 27 22 42 W ]. { Earle p. 159 } [ Legacy and honours ] Grenville&apos;s final battle on Revenge is commemorated in a poem by Alfred Tennyson ( &quot; The Revenge &quot; ). It was set for choir and orchestra by composer Charles Villiers Stanford ( &quot; The Revenge &quot; ). One of the five houses of British public school Churcher&apos;s College is named after Grenville. There are also houses named after him at Dulwich College, Queen Elizabeth&apos;s High School and Devonport High School for Boys. Grenville College, the private school in Bideford, was named after Grenville. The school has since been combined with Edgehill College and renamed the Kingsley School. A Royal Canadian Sea Cadet Corp, 93 R.C.S.C.C. Grenville, is located in Kelowna, B.C., Canada. [ In popular culture ] Grenville&apos;s final battle on Revenge is mentioned in a poem by Robert E. Howard; ( &quot; Solomon Kane&apos;s Homecoming &quot; ) from Fanciful Tales (1936). Howard mentions Grenville in several other Solomon Kane stories and poems, most prominently in &quot; The Return of Sir Richard Grenville &quot;. Grenville is the subject of a 20th century song by Al Stewart, &quot; Lord Grenville, &quot; ( &quot; Lord Grenville &quot; ) on Stewart&apos;s Year of the Cat album. [ Notes ] [ References ] [ Grenville, Richard (1541?-1591) ] Bagwell, Richard, Ireland under the Tudors 3 vols. (London, 1885 –1890). Canny, Nicholas P., The Elizabethan Conquest of Ireland: a Pattern Established, 1565 –76 (London, 1976). ISBN 0-85527-034-9. Earle, Peter, The Last Fight of the Revenge (London, 2004) ISBN 0-413-77484-8 Falls, Cyril, Elizabeth&apos;s Irish Wars (1950; reprint London, 1996). ISBN 0-09-477220-7. Milton, Giles, Big Chief Elizabeth - How England&apos;s Adventurers Gambled and Won the New World, Hodder &amp; Stoughton, London (2000) Powell, Andrew Thomas, Grenville and the Lost Colony of Roanoke (London 2011). ISBN 978-1-84876-596-2. Rowse, A. L.. Sir Richard Grenville of the Revenge (London, 1937). [ June 2011 ] [ April 2012 ] [ Grenville, Richard 6 June 1542 Buckland Abbey, Devon, England 10 September 1591 off Flores, Azores Islands ] Category:1542 births Category:1591 deaths Category:People from Buckland Monachorum Category:English explorers Category:English sailors Category:English military personnel killed in action Category:People of Elizabethan Ireland Category:People of the Tudor period Category:16th-century English people Category:Grenville family Category:High Sheriffs of Cornwall Category:Members of the Parliament of England (pre-1707) de:Richard Grenville es:Richard Grenville fr:Richard Grenville it:Richard Grenville ru:Гренвилл, Ричард simple:Richard Grenville