[ B 1850 8 25 1935 12 4 ] [ 1850 8 25 1935 12 4 ] { Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine (1913) } Charles Robert Richet (August 25, 1850 – December 4, 1935) was a French physiologist who initially investigated a variety of subjects such as neurochemistry, digestion, thermoregulation in homeothermic animals, and breath ing. He won the Nobel Prize &quot; in recognition of his work on anaphylaxis &quot; in 1913. [ http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/medicine/laureates/1913/index.html The Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine 1913 Charles Richet Nobelprize.org 5 July 2010 ] He also devoted many years to the study of spiritualist phenomena. [ Life ] In 1887 Richet was named professor of physiology at the Collège de France, and in 1898 he became a member of the Académie de Médecine. It was, however, together with Paul Portier, their work on anaphylaxis (his term for a sensitized individual&apos;s sometimes lethal reaction to a second, small-dose injection of an antigen ) that in 1913 won him the Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine. This research helped elucidate hay fever, asthma and other allergic reaction s to foreign substances and explained some previously not understood cases of intoxication and sudden death. In 1914 he became a member of the Académie des Sciences. Richet was a man of many interests, and his works included books about history, sociology, philosophy, psychology, as well as theatre plays and poetry. He was a pioneer in aviation. He also had a deep interest in extrasensory perception and hypnosis. In 1884 Alexander Aksakov interested him in the medium Eusapia Palladino. In 1891 Richet founded the Annales des sciences psychiques. He kept in touch with renowned occultist s and spiritist s of his time such as Albert von Schrenck-Notzing, Frederic William Henry Myers and Gabriel Delanne. In 1905 Richet was named president of the Society for Psychical Research in the United Kingdom, and coined the terms &quot; ectoplasm. &quot; He experimented with Marthe Béraud, Elisabette D&apos;Espérance, William Eglinton and Stefan Ossowiecki. In 1919 he became honorary president of the Institut Métapsychique International in Paris, and, in 1929, full-time president. [ Parapsychology ] As a scientist Richet was positive about a physical explanation for paranormal phenomena. { Alvarado, C. S. (2006). Human radiations: Concepts of force in mesmerism, spiritualism and psychical research. Journal of the Society for Psychical Research, 70, 138–162. } He wrote &quot; It has been shown that as regards subjective metapsychics the simplest and most rational explanation is to suppose the existence of a faculty of supernormal cognition … setting in motion the human intelligence by certain vibrations that do not move the normal senses. &quot; { Richet, C. (1923). Thirty Years of Psychical Research. New York: Macmillan. (Translated from the second French edition) } He later wrote about a “sixth sense,” an ability to perceive the hypothetical vibrations, he discussed this theory in his book Our Sixth Sense (1928). { Richet, C. (nd, ca 1928). Our Sixth Sense. London: Rider. (First published in French, 1928) } He also believed that some mediumship could be explained physically due to the external projection of a material substance (ectoplasm) from the body of the medium. { Richet, C. (1923). Thirty Years of Psychical Research. New York: Macmillan. (Translated from the second French edition) } [ Works ] [ Charles Robert Richet ] Richet&apos;s works on parascientific subjects, which dominated his late years, include Traité de Métapsychique (Treatise on Metapsychics, 1922), Notre Sixième Sens (Our Sixth Sense, 1928), L&apos;Avenir et la Prémonition (The Future and Premonition, 1931) and La grande espérance (The Great Hope, 1933). Richet, C. Traité de métapsychique (Paris, F. Alcan, 1922). Maxwell, J &amp; Richet, C. Metapsychical phenomena: methods and observations (London : Duckworth, 1905). [ See also ] Breguet-Richet Gyroplane Eusapia Palladino [ Notes ] [ External links ] Short biography and bibliography in the Virtual Laboratory of the Max Planck Institute for the History of Science Richet&apos;s &apos;&apos;Dictionnaire de physiologie&apos;&apos; (1895–1928) as fullscan from the original Charles Robert Richet photo Charles Richet Biography on Nobel Prize website Short biography by Nandor Fodor on SurvivalAfterDeath.org.uk with links to several articles on psychical research [ Richet, Charles Robert August 25, 1850 December 4, 1935 ] Category:French physiologists Category:Nobel laureates in Physiology or Medicine Category:French Nobel laureates Category:Corresponding Members of the St Petersburg Academy of Sciences Category:Hypnosis Category:French occultists Category:French writers on paranormal topics Category:Parapsychologists Richet, Charles Robert Richet, Charles Robert ar:شارل ريشه be:Шарль Рышэ bg:Шарл Рише ca:Charles Robert Richet da:Charles Robert Richet de:Charles Robert Richet es:Charles Robert Richet eo:Charles Robert Richet fa:شارل ریشه fr:Charles Richet gl:Charles Robert Richet hr:Charles Robert Richet io:Charles Robert Richet id:Charles Robert Richet it:Charles Robert Richet sw:Charles Richet nl:Charles Richet ja:シャルル・ロベール・リシェ no:Charles Richet oc:Charles Robert Richet pnb:چارلز رچٹ pl:Charles Robert Richet pt:Charles Robert Richet ro:Charles Robert Richet ru:Рише, Шарль simple:Charles Robert Richet sl:Charles Robert Richet fi:Charles Richet sv:Charles Richet tr:Charles Robert Richet uk:Шарль Робер Ріше vi:Charles Robert Richet zh:夏尔·罗贝尔·里歇