[ the geological term other uses Tertiary (disambiguation) ] [ Cenozoic ] Tertiary is an officially deprecated but still widely used term for a geologic period from 65 million to 2.6 million years ago, a time span that lies between the superseded Secondary period and the Quaternary. The period began with the demise of the non- avian dinosaur s in the Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event, at the start of the Cenozoic Era, spanning to the beginning of the most recent ice age, at the end of the Pliocene Epoch. The Tertiary also included the early Pleistocene. The Tertiary is no longer recognized as a formal unit by the International Commission on Stratigraphy, { International Stratigraphic Chart } [ April 2012 ] its traditional span being divided between the Paleogene and Neogene Periods of the Cenozoic Era. [ Historical use of the term ] The term Tertiary was first used by Giovanni Arduino during the mid-18th century. He classified geologic time into primitive (or primary), secondary, and tertiary periods based on observations of geology in northern Italy. { Carl O. Dunbar, Historical Geology, 2nd ed. (1964), John Wiley &amp; Sons, New York, p. 352 } Later a fourth period, the Quaternary, was applied. In the early development of the study of geology, the periods were thought to correspond to the Biblical narrative, the rocks of the Tertiary being thought to be associated with the Great Flood. { Rudwick, M.J.S (1992): Scenes from Deep Time: Early Pictorial Representations of the Prehistoric World, } { University of Chicago Press, 280 pages. Except from Google Books } In 1828, Charles Lyell incorporated a Tertiary Period into his own, far more detailed system of classification. He subdivided the Tertiary Period into four epochs according to the percentage of fossil mollusk s resembling modern species found in those strata. He used Greek names: Eocene, Miocene, Older Pliocene and Newer Pliocene. Although these divisions seemed adequate for the region to which the designations were originally applied (parts of the Alps and plains of Italy), when the same system was later extended to other parts of Europe and to America, it proved to be inapplicable. Therefore, the use of mollusks was abandoned from the definition and the epochs were renamed and redefined. [ Geological events ] Tectonic activity continued as Gondwana finally split completely apart, and India collided with the Eurasian plate. South America was connected to North America toward the end of the Tertiary. Antarctica — which was already separate — drifted to its current position over the South Pole. Widespread volcanic activity was prevalent. [ Climate ] Climate s during the Tertiary slowly cooled, starting off in the Paleocene with tropical-to-moderate worldwide temperatures and ending before the first extensive glaciation at the start of the Quaternary. [ References ] [ p c ] Category:Cenozoic bg:Терциер ca:Terciari cs:Třetihory da:Tertiær de:Tertiär et:Tertsiaar eo:Terciaro fr:Tertiaire (géologie) ko:제3기 hi:तृतीय कल्प hr:Tercijar is:Tertíertímabilið he:שלישון ka:მესამეული სისტემა kk:Үштік кезең hu:Harmadidőszak nl:Tertiair ja:第三紀 no:Tertiær nn:Tertiærtida pl:Trzeciorzęd pt:Terciário ro:Terțiar ru:Третичный период simple:Tertiary sk:Terciér sl:Terciar sh:Tercijar fi:Tertiäärikausi sv:Tertiär tr:Tersiyer uk:Третинний період vi:Phân đại Đệ tam zh:第三紀