[ August 2011 April 2008 April 2008 ] [ edutainment May 2012 ] Educational games are game s that are designed to teach people about certain subjects, expand concepts, reinforce development, understand an historical event or culture, or assist them in learning a skill as they play. The types of games include board, card, and video game s. [ Board games ] A board game is a game that involves counters or pieces moved or placed on a pre-marked surface or &quot; board &quot;, according to a set of rules. Games can be based on pure strategies, chances (e.g. rolling dice) or a mixture of the two, and usually have a goal which a player aims to achieve. Early board games represented a battle between two armies, and most current board games are still based on defeating opposing players in terms of counters, winning position or accrual of points (often expressed as in-game currency). There are many different types and styles of board games. Their representation of real-life situations can range from having no inherent theme, as with checkers, to having a specific theme and narrative, as with Cluedo. Rules can range from the very simple, as in tic-tac-toe, to those describing a game universe in great detail, as in Dungeons &amp; Dragons (although most of the latter are role-playing games where the board is secondary to the game, helping to visualize the game scenario). The amount of time required to learn to play or master a game varies greatly from game to game. Learning time does not necessarily correlate with the number or complexity of rules; some games, such as chess or Go, have simple rulesets while possessing profound strategies. [ Card games ] A card game is any game using playing cards as the primary device with which the game is played, be they traditional or game-specific. Countless card games exist, including families of related games (such as poker). A small number of card games played with traditional decks have formally standardized rules, but most are folk games whose rules vary by region, culture, and person. [ Video games ] A video game is an electronic game that involves human interaction with a user interface to generate visual feedback on a video device. The word video in video game traditionally referred to a raster display device,[1] but following popularization of the term &quot; video game &quot;, it now implies any type of display device. The electronic systems used to play video games are known as platforms; examples of these are personal computers and video game consoles. These platforms range from large mainframe computers to small handheld devices. Specialized video games such as arcade games, while previously common, have gradually declined in use. Video games have gone on to become an art form and industry. The input device used to manipulate video games is called a game controller, and varies across platforms. For example, a controller might consist of only a button and a joystick, while another may feature a dozen buttons and one or more joysticks. Early personal computer games often needed a keyboard for gameplay, or more commonly, required the user to buy a separate joystick with at least one button.[2] Many modern computer games allow or require the player to use a keyboard and a mouse simultaneously. A few of the most common game controllers are gamepads, mice, keyboards, and joysticks.. [ Educational computer games ] With the impact of environmental damage and the need for institutions to become &quot; paperless &quot; [4], more educational institutions are seeking alternative ways of assessment and testing, which has always traditionally been known to use up vasts amount of paper. Assessment software refers to software with a primary purpose of assessing and testing students in a virtual environment. Assessment software allows students to complete tests and examinations using a computer or a laptop, usually networked. The software then scores each test transcript and outputs results for each student. Assessment software is available in various delivery methods, the most popular being self-hosted software, online software and hand-held voting systems. Proprietary software and open-source software systems are available. While technically falling into the Courseware category (see above), Skill evaluation lab is an example for Computer-based assessment software with PPA-2 (Plan, Prove, Assess) methodology[5] to create and conduct computer based online examination. Moodle is an example of open-source software with an assessment component that is gaining popularity. Other popular international assessment systems include QuestionMark and EvaluNet XT.There can be also defined strategy war games that include historical references like the Total War franchise or the Age of Empires trilogy and an in-game encyclopaedia like Civilization. These games often combine entertainment and education but without being explicitly educational. Popular educational games for children and adolescents Big Brain Academy: Wii Degree ClickN READ Phonics - Beginning Reading ClickN SPELL - Beginning Spelling Carmen Sandiego series The ClueFinders Dr. Kawashima&apos;s Brain Training (a series of two games) EcoQuest (a series of two games) GCompris ( GPL ) Genomics Digital Lab Gizmos &amp; Gadgets History of Biology game Immune Attack Inanimate Alice InLiving I.M. Meen JumpStart Ko&apos;s Journey Learnalot Math Blaster Number Munchers Oregon Trail PlaceSpotting Quest Atlantis Reader Rabbit The Magic School Bus series Treasures of the Deep Tuxmath ( GPL ) Storybook Weaver Urban Jungle Zoombinis WolfQuest Popular educational games for adults Democracy Food Force Global Conflict: Palestine Mavis Beacon Teaches Typing &apos;&apos; Miniconomy President Forever 2008 + Primaries The Typing of the Dead CyberCIEGE Close Combat: Marines Virtonomics [ Generic Skins for Computer Based Games ] Virtual Learning Environments (VLEs), such as Moodle and Blackboard, can act as a front-end user interface for educational tests. Games based on such tests can be single or multi-player games. Such generic user interfaces are called skins. { Srinivasan Ramani et al. Games as Skins for Online Tests, } { HP Laboratories, July 21, 2008 } These skins are popular with schools, an example of a school using Moodle is Coundon Court School and Community College, they can be ideal as a learning environment for pupils using IT. [ source required August 2011 ] [ See also ] Educational toy Edutainment [ Footnotes ] [ References ] [ 1803-537X ] Video games &apos;stimulate learning&apos;, BBC News, March 18, 2002 Dostál, J. Educational software and computer games - tools of modern education, Journal of Technology and Information Education. 2009, Palacký University, Olomouc, Volume 1, Issue 1, p.  24 - 28. Lin, G. H. C., Kung, T. W. T., Chien, S. C.(2011) Computer Games Functioning as Motivation Stimulants http://www.eric.ed.gov/PDFS/ED528578.pdf [ External links ] Educational Games Nobelprize.org Epistemic Games Group, University of Wisconsin-Madison Games For Change LeapFrog Leapad Educational System Searchable database of educational computer games Category:Video game types ar:الألعاب التعليمية cs:Didaktická hra de:Lernspiel fr:Logiciel ludo-éducatif ko:교육용 게임 it:Videogioco educativo no:Pedagogiske spill pt:Jogos educacionais ru:Развивающие игры fi:Oppimispeli uk:Навчальна відеогра zh:教育遊戲