[ September 2008 ] [ Thailand ] { Capital } { Chonburi } { Governor } { Seni Chittakasem (since  May 2009) } { 4363.0 } { Ranked 51st } { 1040865 } { 2000 } { Ranked 16th } { auto } { Ranked 13th } { Thailand Standard Time } { +7 } { TH-20 } Chonburi ( [ ชลบุรี ] [ tɕ͡ʰōn būrīː th-chonburi.ogg ] ) is a province (changwat) of Thailand. Neighboring provinces are (from north clockwise) Chachoengsao, Chanthaburi and Rayong. To the west is the Gulf of Thailand. The eastern seaboard is heavily industrialized and underpinned by shipping, transportation, tourism, and manufacturing industries, and second to only Bangkok in economic output. [ October 2008 ] [ History ] From historical evidence, Mueang Chonburi has been settled since the Ayutthaya period. Originally, it comprised many small towns such as Mueang Bang Sai, Mueang Bang Pla Soi, and Mueang Bang Phra. Later, King Rama V combined these towns together into Chonburi Province. [ October 2008 ] [ Etymology ] The word Chon originates from the Sanskrit word Jala meaning water, and the word buri from Sanskrit Puri meaning town or city. Hence the name of the province literally means City of Water. [ Geography ] The province is located at the Bay of Bangkok, the northern end of the Gulf of Thailand. The Khao Khiao mountain range stretches from the north-west to the south-east of the province, while the fertile plains of the north were long used for farming. In Laem Chabang, in the south of the province, is one of the few deep-water harbours of Thailand. [ Miscellaneous ] Pattaya, located on the Gulf of Thailand, is a major international tourist destination. The 20th World Scout Jamboree, organised by the World Organization of the Scout Movement, drew 30,000 teenage Boy Scout s to a naval base near the village of Sattahip, where activities included: world issue awareness, a showcase of Thai science &amp; technology, and obstacle course-style competitions between scouts from different nations. The province of Chonburi is one of the few Thai provinces, which do not possess a City Pillar Shrine Lak Mueang. There is a plan to construct a shrine by 2012. [ Symbols ] The provincial seal shows the hill Khao Sam Muk, on which a shrine is located. The local people believe that the spirit of that mountain protects the fishermen from harm. The legend says that in the 18th century a Chinese girl threw herself from the cliff after her parents objected to her marriage to her lover, read about this here: http://www.hatbangsaen.com/lovestory.html. { &apos;&apos;Khao Sam Muk&apos;&apos; } Provincial tree as well as flower is the Burmese Rosewood ( Pterocarpus indicus, local name Pradu). The provincial slogan is Beautiful Beaches, Delicious Khao Lam, Sweet Sugar Cane, Delicate Basketry Products, and Buffalo Racing. [ Administrative divisions ] Map of Amphoe The province is subdivided in 11 districts ( amphoe ). These are further subdivided into 92 subdistricts ( tambon ) and 691 villages ( muban ). | Mueang Chonburi Ban Bueng Nong Yai Bang Lamung Phan Thong Phanat Nikhom &lt; li &gt; Si Racha &lt; li &gt; Ko Sichang &lt; li &gt; Sattahip &lt; li &gt; Bo Thong &lt; li &gt; Ko Chan [ Cities &amp; amp; Towns ] Rank City/Town Amphoe (District) population Area(km²) community town of 1 Pattaya Bang Lamung 101,939 22.2 2 Chaophraya Surasak Si Racha 80,088 306.44 Si Racha 3 Ban Suan Mueang Chonburi 61,072 n/a Chon Buri 4 Laem Chabang Si Racha (and a part of Bang Lamung ) 64,607 109.65 5 Nong Prue Bang Lamung 49,558 45.54 Pattaya 6 Saen Suk Mueang Chonburi 42,843 20.843 Chon Buri Tourist information can be found here: http://www.hatbangsaen.com 7 Chon Buri * Mueang Chonburi 34,744 4.567 8 Angsila Mueang Chonburi 25,673 18.6 Chon Buri 9 Sattahip* Sattahip 22,539 6.22 10 Huay Yai Bang Lamung 22,208 153 Pattaya 11 Si Racha * Si Racha 19,221 4.058 12 Ban Bueng* Ban Bueng 16,336 n/a 13 Huay Kapi Mueang Chonburi 15,297 14.5 Chon Buri 14 Mon Nang Phanat Nikhom 13,522 52.58 Phanat Nikhom 15 Phanat Nikhom* Phanat Nikhom 11,717 2.76 16 Bang Sai Mueang Chonburi 11,140 2.16 Chon Buri 17 Nong Maidaeng Mueang Chonburi 10,689 10 Chon Buri 18 Bang Sare Sattahip 7,875 7.87 Sattahip 19 Hua Lo Mueang Chonburi 7,670 18.5 Chon Buri 20 Tha Bunmee Ko Chan 6,348 5.692 21 Ko Sichang* Ko Sichang 4,975 7.9 22 Nong Phai Kaew Ban Bueng 2,018 11.692 Ban Bueng * capital of district [ Tourism ] [ October 2008 ] [ Sights ] Wat Yansangwararam { Wat Khao Phra Phutthabat Bang Sai (วัดเขาพระพุทธบาทบางทราย) Inside the Mondop–a square building with a crown-like cupola resides the Buddha’s footprint. From the end of the fourth lunar month to the second day of the fifth month during the period of the waxing moon, there is a tradition that people will proceed up the hill to pay respect to the Buddha’s footprint. } Wat Yai Inthraram (วัดใหญ่อินทราราม) It is a significant temple of Mueang Chon Buri, influenced by the late Ayutthayan architectural style. The Ubosot was built in its Gunwale Curve base and inside displays mural paintings. Phra Phutthaishing Shrine (หอพระพุทธสิหิงค์) The shrine houses are a replica of the Phra Phutthaishing cast in pure silver. Wat Thammanimit (วัดธรรมนิมิตต์) It was constructed in 1941 and is a place where the Phra Phutthamongkhon Nimit Buddha image resides. It is a concrete Buddha image decorated with mosaic tiles in the Boarding a Boat posture. Ang Sila (อ่างศิลา) is a seaside fishing village. Most villagers are skilled in making implements from granite. Items made are mainly mortar and pestle widely used in Thai households in the olden times and figurines of animals. Wihan Thep Sathit Phra Kitti Chaloem or Nacha Sa Thai Chue Shrine (วิหารเทพสถิตพระกิติเฉลิม หรือ ศาลเจ้าหน่าจาซาไท้จื้อ) It is a Chinese shrine. It is a 4-storey building decorated in Chinese architectural art and housing various Chinese deity images. Khao Sam Muk (เขาสามมุข) is a low hillock situated between Ang Sila and Bang Saen Beach, along the Road, facing the seashore. A habitat of scores of wild monkeys, the hill-top view descends on the Bang Saen Beach. The Marine Scientific Institute (สถาบันวิทยาศาสตร์ทางทะเล) Situated in the Burapha University at Bang Saen Beach. It is a modern aquarium with underwater environment. Bang Saen Beach, (หาดบางแสน) is a well-known holiday beach only 14 kilometres from the provincial town. In 1943, the government built the first holiday resort in the country here. It is now under the supervision of Saen Suk Municipal Administration. Tourist information can be found here: http://www.hatbangsaen.com Laem Thaen (แหลมแท่น) is in the area of Bang Saen Beach near Khao Sam Muk. It is a cape reaching out to the sea where restaurants are situated. People go to do fishing in the area. A big part of Laem Thaen has been constructed over the sea in the last few years, the area is used for many festivities like concerts, markets and during Friday and Saturday evenings the &quot; Bangsaen Walking &quot; street. (http://www.walkingstreet.co.th/ ) Big events like Bangsaen Bikeweek are also centered around this area. Sriracha Tiger Zoo (สวนเสือศรีราชา) At km 20 on Highway No. 3241 between Pattaya and Bang Saen Beach, or 10 kilometres from Si Racha District, this is a well-maintained zoo with hoards of crocodiles, Bengal tigers, camel, deer, scorpions and more. Khao Kheow Open Zoo (สวนสัตว์เปิดเขาเขียว) This zoo operated by the Zoological Garden Organization and covers a vast tract of forestland. There are more than 200 species of wildlife living in their natural habitual. They include both domestic and imported species. Ko Sichang (เกาะสีชัง) Twelve kilometers off the shore of Si Racha is the large island of Sichang offering mountain and sea views. Ko Sichang has served as a cargo station since the early days of the country’s trading history. It is also the site of a summer palace built during the reign of King Rama V. Chao Pho Khao Yai Shrine (ศาลเจ้าพ่อเขาใหญ่) The shrine is a natural architecture masterpiece, revered by both the Thai and Chinese worshippers. From here the front side of the island with a panoramic view of Sichang community can be clearly seen. Ao Udom Scenario (บรรยากาศทะเลอ่าวอุดม เทศบาลนครแหลมฉบัง อ.ศรีราชา)The Scene of Ao Udom area is based on the cargo shipment as transfer from barge to vessel, vessel to coast and fuel jetty. More jetty and Ao Udom as operated by private sector; PTT, THAIOIL, ESSO, SIAM COMMERCIAL, KERRY LOGISTIC and etc. Bann Ao Udom is small fishery village more over than 100 years ago; WATT MAI NERN PAYOM is only one Buddhist temple in this village. Mondop atop Buddha’s Footprint (มณฑปรอยพระพุทธบาท) King Rama V had this footprint replica installed on top of Khaya Sira Hill. Hat Tham Khao Phang (หาดถ้ำเขาพัง) Hat Tham Khao Phang at the back of the island surrounds this white sandy beach. The sloping beach is thus on the un-windy side. Khao Khat Pass and Hat Hin Klom (ช่องเขาขาดและหาดหินกลม) The name of “Hat Hin Klom” comes from the rounded rocks on the beach which have been “rounded” by the westerly wind that normally comes from March to September. Phra Chuthathut Ratchathan (พระจุฑาธุชราชฐาน) The only palace amidst the sea, King Rama V had it built in 1892 as a holiday retreat and a convalescence home for his wives and children. Residential quarters, lawns, pools, and swamps are designed and located in ascending tiers from the beach up to the top of the hill, alternated with frangipani trees (Plumeria acuminata) of different colours. Ko Thai Khangkhao (เกาะท้ายค้างคาว) is a small island on the southern side of Ko Sichang where there is a sandy beach and coral. Amphoe Bang Lamung and Mueang Pattaya Underwater World (อันเดอร์วอเตอร์ เวิลด์) is an aquarium where there is a collection of marine species in the Gulf of Thailand. The tunnel is 105 metres long divided into 4 zones. Moreover, there are marine lives feeding shows, both on the surface of the water and underwater in each zone. [ Pattaya ] Pattaya beach (หาดพัทยา) The half-moon-shaped beach is about 4 kilometres long with Beach Road running parallel to the beach. Suan Chaloemphrakiat (สวนเฉลิมพระเกียรติ) This is a fitness park at the foot of Khao Pattaya. With an area of [ 6 acre m2 ], the park was dedicated to commemorate His Majesty the King’s sixtieth birthday on December 5, 1988. Jomtien Beach (หาดจอมเทียน) This 6-kilometre-long beach is only 4 kilometre from Pattaya. Beach Road runs parallel to the shore along which are hotels, restaurants, and a beach sports pavilion. Wong Phra Chan (หาดวงพระจันทร์) This small tranquil one kilometre beach is on the northern side of Pattaya Bay. Sanctuary of Truth (ปราสาทสัจธรรม) This gigantic wooden structure is situated by the sea at Laem Ratchawet, North Pattaya. The Sanctuary of Truth was first built in 1981 by Mr. Lek Wiriyaphan, the founder of the Ancient City in Samut Prakan Province. The Million-Year Stone Park and Crocodile Farm (อุทยานหินล้านปีและฟาร์มจระเข้พัทยา) Its grounds are landscaped with flowering and rock gardens. Hundreds of crocodiles as well as some rare animals, including albino bears and horses, are kept. Mini Siam (เมืองจำลองพัทยา) is a famous model village. It celebrates the heritages of Thailand with miniature replicas of the most famous monuments and historical sites. Pattaya Elephant Village (หมู่บ้านช้างพัทยา) This elephant camp focuses on daily life of elephants and their masters and also offers stage shows demonstrating how to catch wild elephants, elephants-at-work in the jungle, elephants playing football and a grand war elephants parade. The Three Kingdoms Park (อุทยานสามก๊ก) is an attraction with the Sino-Thai architectural style. The art objects in this place are in accordance with the Chinese Fengshui: a 5-storey building, displaying oil paintings of the life story of Kong Ming, as well as, Jiangxi sculptures of leading characters from the chronicle in the Romance of the Three Kingdoms. Ripley’s World of Entertainment (ริบลีส์ เวิล์ด ออฟ เอนเตอร์เทนเม้นท์) is located on the 3rd floor of the Royal Garden Plaza Department Store, on Pattaya Beach Road. Pattaya Park and Tower (สวนสนุกพัทยาปาร์ค) Pattaya Park Beach Resort and Tower at Jomtien Beach features a large whirlpool with giant sliders and a tower with a revolving restaurant. Ko Lan (เกาะล้าน) This island is 7.5 kilometres from South Pattaya. It has beaches with white sand and clear water which are on the western side of the island. Ko Sak (เกาะสาก) Six hundred metres north of Ko Lan is Ko Sak, a small island shaped like an upturn horseshoe. There are two connecting beaches to the north and south. Mu Ko Phai (หมู่เกาะไผ่) is 23 kilometres from Pattaya beach comprising Ko Phai, Ko Man Wichai, Ko Lueam and Ko Klueng Badan. Ko Phai is the biggest one and is under the supervision of the Royal Thai Navy. Anek Kuson Sala (Wihan Sian) (เอนกกุศลศาลา (วิหารเซียน)) is the place collecting high-class Chinese architecture and fine arts constructed in 1987 to celebrate the 60th anniversary of His Majesty the King’s birthday. Wat Yanasangwararam Woramahawihan (วัดญาณสังวรารามวรมหาวิหาร) At the entrance are situated international pavilions. Within the compound of the temple are the Mondop where a replica of the Buddha’s footprint is enshrined, a large Chedi containing the relics of the Lord Buddha, as well as, his enlightened followers, and Wihan Phra Yanaret. Thai Alangkarn Theater Pattaya ( โรงละคร ไทย &quot; อลังการ &quot; ) The entire project includes a prototype hexa stage theater with 2,000 seats in tiers, cultural rostrum and a restaurant. The show, called ‘The Thai Extravaganza Show‘, is presenting Thailand through a new panoramic concept with the use of hi-tech equipment such as the multi-color lasers, surround sound system, and pyrotechnic, which synchronize with the act from more than hundred experienced of performers on stage. The &apos;&apos;Phra Phuttha Maha Wachira Uttamophat Satsada&apos;&apos; of Khao Chi Chan The Laser Beams Cast Buddha Image of Khao Chi Chan (พระพุทธรูปแกะสลักเขาชีจรรย์) The image is in the subduing Mara posture, cast by laser beams on the Khao Chi Chan cliff. It is a combination of Sukhothai and Lanna arts. The image called “Phra Phuttha Maha Wachira Uttamophat Satsada” was constructed in 1996 to honour His Majesty the King. Wat Sattahip or Wat Luangpho I (วัดสัตหีบ หรือ วัดหลวงพ่ออี๋) It was constructed during the reign of King Rama V by Luangpho I or Phrakhru Worawet Muni who possessed knowledge of meditation and was the comforter for local in their difficult times. Therefore, the monk was highly respected among the locals. Hat Toei Ngam (หาดเตยงาม) Lines of toei trees (Pandanus kaida Kurz) on the 200 metre crescent beach add to the tranquillity of the atmosphere. At the northern side of the beach is located a naval museum and monument. Hat Sai Kaeo (หาดทรายแก้ว) is a beach under the supervision of the Royal Thai Navy and is near the Naval Rating School. Hat Nang Ram (หาดนางรำ) Nang Ram beach is about 200 metres long. At the tip of the beach stands the shrine of Kromluang Chumphonkhetudomsak, the Father of Royal Thai Navy. Hat Nang Rong (หาดนางรอง) is a short distance beyond Hat Nang Ram. It is a 200- metre beach with pine trees. Hat Thian Tale (หาดเทียนทะเล) It is a sandy beach alternating with rocks, covering an area of 900 metres. It is a panoramic sightseeing point, with a bizarre shape of cliffs with a view of the sunset. HTMS Chakri Naruebet (เรือรบหลวงจักรีนฤเบศร) is an offshore patrol helicopter carrier anchored at the Chuk Samet Deep Seaport. The important missions during wartime are the flagship of the fleet, controlling and commanding the fleet in the sea, as well as the aircraft carrier and air defence mission Turtle Conservation Center, the Royal Thai Navy (ศูนย์อนุรักษ์พันธุ์เต่าทะเล กองทัพเรือ) Its objective is the preservation awareness towards Thai sea turtles. Chong Samaesan Village (หมู่บ้านช่องแสมสาร) Chong Samaesan is another village offering fishing opportunities. Suan Chunlakan Sathit Sathan Banphachon Siam (สวนจุลการสถิตสถานบรรพชนสยาม) is a park built for Admiral Prince Krommaluang Chumphon Khet Udomsak in 1995. There is a shrine and statues of Prince Krommaluang Chumphon Khet Udomsak and significant persons in Thai history as well as revered Buddhist monks in the past are situated. Phra Phuttha Ming Mueang (พระพุทธมิ่งเมือง) is an engraved Buddha image out of padauk wood in the posture of subduing Mara. It is the Laotian art, constructed by the Laotians who immigrated into this area. It is near the community centre of the Phanat Nikhom municipality office. Ho Phra Phanatbodi (หอพระพนัสบดี) It is a place where a replica of Phra Phanatbodi (Vanaspati) is enshrined. It is a dignified standing Buddha image whose age is approximately 1,200-1,300 years. It was elaborately engraved out of a black stone. Wat Chum Saeng Si Wanaram (วัดชุมแสงศรีวนาราม) The distinguishing point of this temple is Sala Kan Parian–a temple hall for the Buddhist monks’ meeting and religious ceremony, constructed of terra-cotta into modern architecture. It is called Mabunkhrong Building Luangpho Tio, Wat Hua Thanon (หลวงพ่อติ้ว วัดหัวถนน) It is an engraved image of taeo wood (called tio wood by the Laotians). During the Songkran period, on 19 April every year, there is a procession carrying the image around the village. Sa Siliam (สระสี่เหลี่ยม) According to legend, it is the pond where Phra Rot in the folk story “Phra Rot-Meri”, brought his cock to drink water in this area when he ran a cock fight to make a living for the 12 ladies. Wat Luang Phrommawat (วัดหลวงพรหมวาส) This temple was once a place where the ceremony of drinking an oath of allegiance was conducted. The temple’s compound is large and abundant. There are a large number of flying foxes in the trees. Wat Tai Ton Lan (วัดใต้ต้นลาน) It was constructed in 1905, representing the interesting architecture of the local skilled craftsmen such as the old wooden Sala Kan Parian–a preaching hall, a pair of swan columns, the cement giant sculpture, the ancient Jiangxi Chinese tiles, and the scripture hall or library made of teakwood surrounded by water. Khao Cha Ang (เขาชะอางค์) ( Amphoe Bo Thong ) is an isolated limestone mountain standing on a plain and an important source of gold and antimony. Inside each mountain are various beautiful caves such as Tham Nam, Tham Khangkhao, Tham Laplae and Tham Mangkon. Tham Khao Cha-ang Song Khrueang (ถ้ำเขาชะอางค์ทรงเครื่อง) It is a large cave with a carrying capacity of thousands of people and a location of beautiful stalagmites and stalactites, as well as, a habitat of a large number of bats. Tham Khao Cha-ang Ha Yot (ถ้ำเขาชะอางค์ห้ายอด) It is also a big cave of stalagmites and stalactites. Moreover, inside is divided into many small chambers. Nong Nooch Tropical Botanical Garden is located about 15 kilometers south of Pattaya. It is a 500-acre (2.0  km 2 ) site of botanical gardens and an orchid nursery where cultural shows with trained chimpanzees and elephants are presented. [ Entertainment ] NightlifeMajor hotels operate gourmet restaurants, cocktail lounges, discothèques, nightclubs and supper clubs which offer food, drinks, music and international entertainment. [ Activities ] Agro-tourism Attractions Silver Lake Vineyard (ไร่องุ่นซิลเวอร์เลก) is located at Mu 7, Tambon Na Jomtien, Sattahip District, covering an area of 400 rai with 12 kinds of grapes, 11 of which are for fresh consumption and the other one is for making wine. Ecotourism Attractions Ko Kham Underwater Park (อุทยานใต้ทะเลเกาะขาม) is an ecotourism attraction within the compound of the Royal Thai Navy in Sattahip. There are many Chan Pha (Dracaena loureiri Gagnep.) trees. It looks like two islands connecting each other with extending land. Snorkelling can be done at the island. Coral Reef Submarine Tours In Pattaya, there are both submarines and semi-submarines to admire the beauty of the coral reefs underwater in the areas of Ko Lan and Ko Sak. [ Local Products ] Famous handicrafts of Chonburi include Ang Sila’s granite mortars and Phanat Nikhom’s basketry. Chonburi has a variety fresh and dried seafood. Chaeng Lon (แจงลอน) This is Chonburi’s special delicacy which uses the same ingredients as Ho Mok (ห่อหมก) with coconut shreds to replace coconut milk. The mixture is hand-molded into small buns on a stick, and charcoal-grilled until cooked. Hoi Cho (หอยจ้อ) This Chinese delicacy is Chonburi’s famous dish because a special kind of sea crabs is used as the main ingredient. Khao Lam (ข้าวหลาม) This specialty is made with sticky rice, sugar and coconut cream cooked in specially-prepared bamboo rods. Stone Products (ผลิตภัณฑ์จากหิน) such as a mortar, whetstone, engraved stone into animal shapes such as lions, elephants, horses and others are widely offered at Ang Sila, on the way from Chonburi to Bang Saen. Products from Pineapple Paper (ผลิตภัณฑ์จากกระดาษใยสับปะรด) are produced in Tambon Nong Kham, Si Racha District. Examples of the products include wine boxes and bags, boxes of tissue paper, perfume boxes, photo albums, folders, sets of envelopes, and boxes of paper note. Basketry Market (ตลาดจักสาน) Long known for its fine basketry products, Amphoe Phanat Nikhom originally made them for daily use. The products were gradually developed into more elaborate and marketable hand-crafted items Artificial fruits made of clay (ผลไม้ดินปั้น). Various kinds of artificial fruits made of clay in miniature size are made, dried by sunlight and painted in actual colors. Then, they are wind dried again. [ Culture ] [ Festivals ] Chonburi Annual Festival (งานนมัสการพระพุทธสิหิงค์และงานกาชาดประจำปีจังหวัดชลบุรี) This fair is held about mid-April during the Songkran Festival. Phra Phutthaishing, Chonburi’s principle Buddha image, is put in a procession around the city. Wan Lai Festival (ประเพณีวันไหล) is a Chonburi merit making day of the seamen on the Thai New Year during the Songkran Festival, organized during 13–20 April every year. There is alms-offering to the monks, ceremony of pouring water onto the Buddha’s image, sand pagoda making, splashing water and local games and sports in Chonburi. The areas where the Wan Lai Festival is organized are as follows: Pattaya–Na Kluea Wan Lai Festival and Na Kluea Kong Khao Fair (งานประเพณีวันไหล พัทยา- นาเกลือ และงานกองข้าวนาเกลือ) are organized on 18–20 April every year at Lan Pho Public Park, Na Kluea and Wat Chai Mongkhon in South Pattaya. Songkran Si Maha Racha Festival and Kong Khao Tradition (งานประเพณีสงกรานต์ศรีมหาราชาและงานประเพณีกองข้าว) is an ancient festival of the Chonburi locals. At present, Si Racha District still preserves this tradition and organizes it every year, during 19–21 April, to worship the gods who have been protecting them throughout the year. Activities comprise of the procession led by the elderly and various organizations in traditional Thai costume, a worship ceremony, spirit offering ceremony, Kong Khao tradition demonstration, local games, demonstrations, and sales of traditional desserts and local food. Ko Phra Sai Wan Lai Festival, Bang Saen (งานประเพณีก่อพระทรายวันไหล บางแสน) is the festival which has been conducted by the Saen Suk people from the past. Originally, it was called “Ngan Thambun Wan Lai”, a gathering of people from various villages to do the merit making in the Songkran Festival or the Thai New Year Day, taking place on 16–17 April, every year. Monks from every temple in Saen Suk sub-district are invited to perform the religious ceremony. There is merit making, food offering and bahting ceremony. Later, there are activities of sand pagoda making, water splashing, local games and sports, etc. Ngan Bun Klang Ban and Phanat Nikhom Basketwork (งานบุญกลางบ้าน และเครื่องจักสานพนัสนิคม) are traditions that have been passed on for a long period of time of the Phanat Nikhom people. They are organized on Friday, Saturday and Sunday in the first week of May or the Thai 6th lunar month. The locals will bring food, offer them to the monks, and dedicate the merit to the guardian spirits, enemies from a former life, the deceased relatives, as well as, to drive out bad things, to ask for rain during the season and to wish for abundant food and plants. After the religious ceremony, there is lunch, local games and a demonstration of Phanat Nikhom basketry making. Chonburi Buffalo Race (งานประเพณีวิ่งควาย) This is a long-established celebration of this most useful animal of Thai farmers. A fun-filled event, it is held not only in Chon Buri itself but also in Ban Bueng and Nong Yai districts. The beasts of burden are dressed outrageously or with admirable creativity by owners depending on their imagination. Assembled in the courtyard in front of the town hall, the buffaloes partake in racing, or take part in physical fitness and “fashion” contests. [ See also ] Chonburi F.C. Sriracha F.C. Pattaya United F.C. Royal Cliff Beach Resort Pattaya Exhibition and Convention Hall [ References ] [ External links ] [ Chonburi, Thailand ] Website of province administration (Thai) Province page from the Tourist Authority of Thailand [ Chonburi Province Chachoengsao Province Chanthaburi Province Rayong Province Bight of Bangkok ] [ 13 21 44 N 100 59 0 E region:TH_type:adm1st title ] Category:Provinces of Thailand Category:Gulf of Thailand Category:Bay of Bangkok ace:Propinsi Chon Buri ar:محافظة تشونبوري zh-min-nan:Chonburi Hú bg:Чонбури bo:ཅཱོན་བུ་རི་ཞིང་ཆེན། de:Chonburi (Provinz) es:Provincia de Chon Buri fa:چونبوری fr:Province de Chonburi gl:Provincia Chon Buri ko:촌부리 주 bpy:চাংৱাত চোনবুরি it:Provincia di Chonburi lo:ຈັງຫວັດຊົນບຸລີ ms:Chonburi nl:Changwat Chonburi ja:チョンブリー県 no:Chonburi (provins) nn:Chonburi fylke pnb:صوبہ چونبوری pl:Prowincja Chonburi pt:Chon Buri (província) ru:Чонбури (провинция) sv:Chon Buri th:จังหวัดชลบุรี tg:Вилояти Чон Бури tr:Chonburi vi:Chon Buri (tỉnh) zh-classical:春武里府 war:Chonburi (lalawigan) wuu:春武里府 zh-yue:春武里府 zh:春武里府