[ Saskatoon Public School Division 180px Public 22,000 Schools 54 Director George Rathwell Teachers&apos; union Saskatchewan Teachers&apos; Federation Saskatoon Canada ] Saskatoon Public Schools (SPS) is the largest school system in Saskatoon and is the second largest in Saskatchewan. Saskatoon Public Schools has approximately 22,000 students with 44 elementary schools and 9 (soon to be 10) high schools. The offices of the Saskatoon School Board are housed in the Eaton&apos;s Building. Saskatoon School Division No. 13 belongs to Department of Saskatchewan Learning Division 4 along with Englefeld Protestant Separate S.D. No. 132,Horizon School Division No. 205, Prairie Spirit School Division No. 206 St. Pauls R.C.S.S.D No. 20, Sun West School Division No. 207 and Division scolaire francophone 310. [ Section 7: Saskatchewan School Divisions http://www.tobaccotoolkit.ca/Tobacco_free_schools/Supports/Saskatchewan%20School%20Divisions.htm 2008-12-21 ] [ Elementary schools ] Brunskill School King George School Princess Alexandra School Wildwood School Alvin Buckwold School Brevoort Park School Brownell School Brunskill School Buena Vista School Caroline Robins School Caswell School College Park School (French Immersion) Confederation Park School Dundonald School Dr. John G. Egnatoff School École Victoria School - Victoria School (Saskatoon) (French Immersion) Fairhaven School Forest Grove School Greystone Heights School Henry Kelsey School (French Immersion) Holliston School Howard Coad School Hugh Cairns V.C. School James L. Alexander School John Dolan School John Lake School King George School Lakeridge School École Lakeview School (French Immersion) Lawson Heights School l&apos;Ecole Francaise de Saskatoon Pavillon élémentaire Lester B. Pearson School Mayfair School Montgomery School North Park Wilson School Pleasant Hill School Prince Philip School Princess Alexandra School Queen Elizabeth School River Heights School (French Immersion) Roland Michener School Saskatoon Christian School Silverspring School Silverwood Heights School Sutherland School Vincent Massey School Westmount School Wildwood School W.P. Bate School [ High schools ] Nutana Collegiate (1910) Aden Bowman Collegiate Bedford Road Collegiate Centennial Collegiate City Park Collegiate Evan Hardy Collegiate l&apos;Ecole Francaise de Saskatoon Pavillon secondaire (L&apos;ecole Canadienne-Francaise) Marion M. Graham Collegiate Mount Royal Collegiate Nutana Collegiate Tommy Douglas Collegiate Walter Murray Collegiate [ Defunct Schools ] Albert School, now the Albert Community Centre Alexandra School - demolished in 1984; name taken by the newer Princess School to become Princess Alexandra School. Albert School - closed in 1978; now the Albert Community Centre. Churchill School - closed in 1985; later the Saskatoon Full Gospel Church (SFGC). A condominium development is under way as of 2012 on part of the former school property. Grosvenor Park School - closed in 1993; now the Saskatoon Islamic Centre. Lorne Haselton School - closed in the mid-1980s; now the Saskatchewan Abilities Council Princess School - demolished in 1961; replaced by a newer Princess (later Princess Alexandra) School. Richmond Heights School - closed in the mid-1980s; now the Park Heights Seniors Centre Thornton School - demolished in 1997; replaced by a townhouse development. original Victoria School - dismantled, moved from its original location on Broadway Avenue and 12th Street, and rebuilt on the University of Saskatchewan campus in 1911. Wilson School - closed in 1993 and almagamated with North Park School to become North Park Wilson School; later becoming the First Nations University of Canada (FNUC) in Saskatoon. In 2011, FNUC sold the building to Affinity Credit Union who is currently converting it to an office. McNab Park School (formerly Air Marshall Curtis School) - closed in the early 1980s and demolished soon after. King Edward School - Originally built in 1904 in the downtown where it doubled as City Hall until demolition in 1956; a replacement school in City Park, adjacent to Kinsmen Park, operated until 1980 when it closed after a fire. The building was demolished and was replaced by King Edward Place, a low-cost housing development. Riverview Collegiate Institute, formerly Saskatoon Technical Collegiate and also known as the Gathercole Centre - built in 1931 along the riverbank in the Central Business District, this high school also housed the Saskatoon Public School Board administrative offices. The school was decommissioned in the 1990s and the school board relocated its offices in the 2000s. After a brief stint as a filming location, the building was demolished in the late 2000s to make way for the city&apos;s River Landing redevelopment. [ References ] [ External links ] Saskatoon Public Schools Saskatoon Public School Division [ Saskatchewan ] Category:School divisions in Saskatchewan Category:Education in Saskatoon