[ For the administrative area, see Province of Brescia. For the football club, see Brescia Calcio. For the University, see Brescia University.For the infantry division see 27 Motorised Division Brescia ] [ Brescia, Italy Città di Brescia Brèsa Tramonto_su_Brescia_(Foto_Luca_Giarelli).jpg Panorama of Brescia Brescia-Stemma.png 45 32 N 10 14 E Lombardy Brescia (BS) Fornaci, Sant&apos;Eufemia, San Polo, Urago Mella, Sant&apos;Anna, Mompiano PdL Adriano Paroli 90.7 197250 582233 April 2011 Bresciani 149 Sts. Faustino and Giovita February 15 25100 030 ] Brescia ( [ ˈbreʃʃa It-Brescia.ogg ]; Lombard : Brèsa [ [ˈbrɛsa] ]; [ Brixia ] ) is a city and comune in the region of Lombardy in northern Italy. It is situated at the foot of the Alps, between the Mella and the Naviglio, with a population of around 197,000. It is the second largest city in Lombardy, after the capital, Milan. Brescia is known as the Lioness of Italy (Leonessa d&apos;Italia) after ten days of popular uprising that took place in the city in the Spring of 1849 against Austrian rule. The city is the administrative capital of the Province of Brescia, one of the largest in Italy, with about 1,200,000 inhabitants. The ancient city of Brixia, Brescia has been an important regional centre since pre-Roman times and a number of Roman and medieval monuments are preserved, among the latter the prominent castle. The city is at the centre of the third-largest Italian industrial area, concentrating on mechanical and automotive engineering and machine tools, as well as the Beretta arms firm. Its companies are typically small or medium-sized enterprises, often with family management. The financial sector is also a major employer, and the tourist trade benefits from the proximity of Lake Garda, Lake Iseo and the Alps. The plan of the old town is rectangular, and the streets intersect at right angles, a peculiarity handed down from Roman times, though the area enclosed by the medieval walls is larger than that of the Roman town, which occupied the north-eastern quarter of the current &quot; Centro storico &quot; (the old town). The Piazza del Foro (Forum Square) marks the site of the Roman-time forum: on the short north side, on the side of the Colle Cidneo (Cidneo Hill) dramatically stands a Corinthian temple with three cellae, which was rediscovered starting in 1823. This temple complex, built on top of an earlier, smaller temple dating from Republican times, was probably the Capitolium of the city; it was erected by Vespasian in 73 AD (if the inscription really belongs to the building { cf. Th. Mommsen in Corp. Inscrip. Lat. v. No. 4312, Berlin, 1872 } ). During excavation, in 1826, a splendid bronze statue of a winged Victory was found within the Capitolium, apparently hidden in late antiquity, probably to preserve it from one of the various sackings that the town had to endure in those times. The Capitolium used to house the Brescia Roman museum but it has been moved to the nearby Santa Giulia (St Julia) complex, a former powerful nunnery, which during Lombard domination was headed by Princess Anselperga, daughter of King Desiderius. In the area are visible (although not open to the public) various other Roman remains. Among these, on the south side of Forum Square there are scanty remains of a building called the curia but which may have been a basilica. East of the Capitolium, and in antiquity attached to it, stands the imposing Roman theatre. Now only part of it is visible because of a palace built in Renaissance times on the slopes of Cidneo Hill, which in time slid down to cover the entire Capitolium-theatre area. It was again used for public performances in the early XX Century but has now long been closed to the public. [ History ] [ Ancient era ] [ Brixia ] { Capitolium. } Various mythological versions of the foundation of Brescia exist: one assigns it to Hercules while another attributes its foundation as Altilia ( &quot; the other Ilium &quot; ) by a fugitive from the siege of Troy. According to a further myth, the founder was the king of the Ligures, Cidnus, who had invaded the Padan Plain in the late Bronze Age; this myth has given its name to the hill where the medieval castle now stands, Colle Cidneo (Cidnus&apos;s Hill).Scholars attribute the foundation to the Etruscan s. Invaded by the Gallic Cenomani, allies of the Insubres, in the 4th century BC, it became their capital. The city became Roman in 225 BC, when the Cenomani submitted to the Romans. During the Carthaginian Wars &apos;Brixia&apos; (as it was called then) was usually allied with the Romans. In 202 BC it was part of a Celtic confederation against them, but, after a secret agreement, changed sides and attacked the Insubres by surprise, destroying them. Subsequently the city and the tribe entered the Roman world peacefully as faithful allies, maintaining a certain administrative freedom. In 89 BC, Brixia was recognized as civitas ( &quot; city &quot; ) and in 41 BC its inhabitants received Roman citizenship. Augustus founded a civil (not military) colony there in 27 BC, and he and Tiberius constructed an aqueduct to supply it. Roman Brixia had at least three temples, an aqueduct, a theater, a forum with another temple built under Vespasianus, and some baths. When Constantine advanced against Maxentius in 312, an engagement took place at Brixia in which the enemy was forced to retreat as far as Verona. In 402, the city was ravaged by the Visigoths of Alaric I. During the invasion of the Huns under Attila, the city was again besieged and sacked in 452 while, some forty years later, it was one of the first conquests of the Gothic general Theoderic the Great in his war against Odoacer. [ Middle Ages ] The castle of Brescia. In 568 (or 569) Brescia was taken from the Byzantines by the Lombards, who made it the capital of one of their semi-independent duchies. The first duke was Alachis, who died in 573. Later dukes included the future kings Rotharis and Rodoald, and Alachis II, a fervent anti-Catholic who was killed in the batte of Cornate d&apos;Adda (688). The last king of the Lombards, Desiderius, had also been duke of Brescia. In 774, Charlemagne captured the city and ended the existence of the Lombard kingdom in northern Italy. Notingus was the first (prince-)bishop (in 844) who bore the title of count (see Bishopric of Brescia ). From 855 to 875, under Louis II the Younger, Brescia become de facto capital of the Holy Roman Empire.Later the power of the bishop as imperial representative was gradually opposed by the local citizens and nobles, Brescia becoming a free commune around the early 12th century. Subsequently it expanded into the nearby countryside, first at the expense of the local landholders, and later against the neighbouring communes, notably Bergamo and Cremona. Brescia defeated the latter two times at Pontoglio, then at the Grumore (mid-12th century) and in the battle of the Malamorte (Bad Death) (1192). During the struggles in XII and XIII centuries between the Lombard cities and the German emperors, Brescia was implicated in some of the leagues and in all of the uprisings against them. In the Battle of Legnano the contingent from Brescia was the second in size after that of Milan. The Peace of Constance (1183) that ended the war with Frederick Barbarossa confirmed officially the free status of the comune. In 1201 the podestà Rambertino Buvalelli made peace and established a league with Cremona, Bergamo, and Mantua. Memorable also is the siege laid to Brescia by the Emperor Frederick II in 1238 on account of the part taken by this city in the battle of Cortenova (27 November 1237). Brescia came through this assault victorious. After the fall of the Hohenstaufen, republican institutions declined at Brescia as in the other free cities and the leadership was contested between powerful families, chief among them the Maggi and the Brusati, the latter of the (pro-imperial, anti-papal) Ghibelline party. In 1258 it fell into the hands of Ezzelino da Romano. In 1311 Emperor Henry VII laid siege to Brescia for six months, losing three-fourths of his army. Later the Scaliger of Verona, aided by the exiled Ghibellines, sought to place Brescia under subjection. The citizens of Brescia then had recourse to John of Luxemburg, but Mastino II della Scala expelled the governor appointed by him. His mastery was soon contested by the Visconti of Milan, but not even their rule was undisputed, as Pandolfo III Malatesta in 1406 took possession of the city. However, in 1416 he bartered it to Filippo Maria Visconti duke of Milan, who in 1426 sold it to the Venetians. The Milanese nobles forced Filippo to resume hostilities against the Venetians, and thus to attempt the recovery of Brescia, but he was defeated in the battle of Maclodio (1427), near Brescia, by general Carmagnola, commander of the Venetian mercenary army. In 1439 Brescia was once more besieged by Francesco Sforza, captain of the Venetians, who defeated Niccolò Piccinino, Filippo&apos;s condottiero. Thenceforward Brescia and the province were a Venetian possession, with the exception of the years between 1512 and 1520, when it was occupied by the French armies under Gaston of Foix, Duke of Nemours. [ Modern era ] [ June 2008 ] Map of Brescia in the early 18th century. Brescia has had a major role in the history of the violin. Many archive documents testify that from 1585 to 1895 Brescia was the cradle of a magnificent school of string players and makers, all styled &quot; maestro &quot;, of all the different kinds of stringed instruments of the Renaissance: viola da gamba (viols), violone, lyra, lyrone, violetta and viola da brazzo. So you can find &quot; maestro delle viole &quot; or &quot; maestro delle lire &quot; and later, at least from 1558, &quot; maestro di far violini &quot; that is master of violin making. From 1530 the word violin appeared in Brescian documents and spread throughout north of Italy. Early in the 16th century Brescia was one of the wealthiest cities of Lombardy, but it never recovered from its sack by the French in 1512. It subsequently shared the fortunes of the Venetian republic until the latter fell at the hands of French general Napoleon Bonaparte; in Napoleonic times, it was part of the various revolutionary republics and then of the Napoleonic Kingdom of Italy after Napoleon became Emperor of the French. In 1769, the city was devastated when the Bastion of San Nazaro was struck by lightning. The resulting fire ignited 90,000  kg of gunpowder stored there, causing a massive explosion which destroyed one-sixth of the city and killed 3,000 people. After the end of the Napoleon ic era in 1815, Brescia was annexed to the Austrian puppet state known as the Kingdom of Lombardy-Venetia.Brescia revolted in 1848; then again in March 1849, when the Piedmontese army invaded Austrian-controlled Lombardy, the people in Brescia overthrew the hated local Austrian administration, and the Austrian military contingent, led by general Haynau, retreated to the Castle. When the larger military operations turned against the Piedmontese, that retreated, Brescia was left to its own resources, but managed to resist recapture by the Austrian army for ten days of bloody and obstinate street fighting that are now celebrated as the Ten Days of Brescia. This prompted poet Giosuè Carducci to nickname Brescia &quot; Leonessa d&apos;Italia &quot; ( &quot; Italian Lioness &quot; ), since it was the only Lombard town to rally to King Charles Albert of Piedmont in that year. In 1859, the citizens of Brescia voted overwhelmingly in favor of its inclusion in the newly-founded Kingdom of Italy. The city was awarded a Gold Medal for its resistance against Fascism in World War II. On May 28, 1974, it was the seat of the bloody Piazza della Loggia bombing. [ Main sights ] Piazza della Loggia, with its Venetian influences. Old Cathedral. New Cathedral. Piazza della Loggia, a noteworthy example of Renaissance piazza, with the eponymous loggia (the current Town Hall) built in 1492 by the architect Filippino de&apos; Grassi. On May 28, 1974, the square was the location of a terrorist bombing. Duomo Vecchio ( &quot; Old Cathedral &quot; ), also known as La Rotonda. It is an exteriorly rusticated Romanesque church, striking for its circular shape. The main structure was built in the 11th century on the ruins of an earlier basilica. Near the entrance is the pink Veronese marble sarcophagus of Berardo Maggi, while in the presbytery is the entrance to the crypt of San Filastrio. The structure houses paintings of the Assumption, the Evangelists Luke and Mark, the Feast of the Paschal Lamb, and Eli and the Angel by Alessandro Bonvicino (known as il Moretto); two canvasses by Girolamo Romanino, and paintings by Palma il Giovane, Francesco Maffei, Bonvicino, and others. Duomo Vecchio Duomo Nuovo ( &quot; New Cathedral &quot; ). Construction on the new cathedral began in 1604 and continued till 1825. While initially a contract was awarded to Palladio, economic shortfalls awarded the project, still completed in a Palladian style, to the young Brescian architect Giovanni Battista Lantana, with decorative projects directed mainly by Pietro Maria Bagnadore. The façade is designed mainly by Giovanni Battista and Antonio Marchetti, while the cupola was designed by Luigi Cagnola. Interior frescoes including the Marriage, Visitation, and Birth of the Virgin, as well as the Sacrifice of Isaac, were frescoed by Bonvicino. The main attraction is the Arch of Sts. Apollonius and Filastrius (1510). Duomo Nuovo. The Broletto, the medieval Town Hall, which now hosts offices of both the Municipality and the Province. It is a massive 12th and 13th century building; on the front, the balcony where the medieval city officials spoke to the townsfolk from; on the north side, still standing one ( Lombard : Tòr del Pégol) of the two original city towers, with a belfry still hosting the bells used of old to call all hands in moments of distress. In Piazza del Foro, as mentioned above, the most important array of Roman remains in Lombardy. The monastery of San Salvatore (or Santa Giulia), dating from the Lombard age but later renovated several times. It is one of the best examples of High Middle Ages architecture in northern Italy; it now hosts, after a decade-long renovation, the City Museum, with a rich Roman section; one of the masterpieces is the bronze statue of a winged Victory, originally probably a Venus, converted in antiquity into the Victory by adding the wings; it is said to be in the act of writing the winner&apos;s name on her shield (now lost). Also very interesting, one of the very few places in the world where the remains of three Roman domus can be visited on their original site simply by strolling into one of the Museum halls. In 2011, it became a UNESCO World Heritage Site as part of a group of seven inscribed as Longobards in Italy. Places of the power (568-774 A.D.). Santa Maria dei Miracoli (1488–1523), with a fine façade by Giovanni Antonio Amadeo, decorated with bas-reliefs and a Renaissance peristilium. The Romanesque-Gothic church of St. Francis of Assisi, with a Gothic façade and cloisters. The castle, at the north-east angle of the town, on top of Colle Cidneo. Besides commanding a fine view of the city and a large part of the surrounding area, and being a local favorite recreational area, it hosts the Arms Museum, with a fine collection of weapons from the Middle Ages onwards; the Risorgimento Museum, dedicated to the Italian independence wars of the XIX century; an exhibition of model railroads; and an astronomical observatory. Church of Santi Nazaro e Celso, with the Averoldi Polyptych by Titian. Church of San Clemente, with numerous painting by Alessandro Bonvicino (generally known as Moretto). Church of San Giovanni, with a refectory painted partly by the Moretto and partly by Girolamo Romanino. Pinacoteca Tosio Martinengo (currently closed for renovations), the municipal art gallery; it hosts works of the painters of the classical Brescian school, Romanino, Bonvicino, and Bonvicino&apos;s pupil, Giovanni Battista Moroni. Biblioteca Queriniana, containing rare early manuscripts, including a 14th-century manuscript of Dante, and some rare incunabula. The city has no fewer than seventy-two public fountains. The stone quarries of Rezzato, 8  km east of Brescia, supplied marble for the Monument to Vittorio Emanuele II in Rome. [ Municipal administration ] Composition of the City Council Party Members PDL 14 PD 11 LN 8 UDC 2 Since 1994 (under the new electoral law, 1993 ) the mayor of Brescia is directly elected by the population. The City Council of Brescia has 40 members (last election, April 2008 ). The mayor of Brescia is Adriano Paroli ( PDL ) since 14 April 2008. Previously Paolo Corsini ( PD ) held the position since 1998 to 2008. [ Sports ] Brescia was the starting and end point of the historical car race Mille Miglia that took place annually in May until 1957 on a Brescia-Rome-Brescia itinerary, and also the now defunct Coppa Florio, one of the first ever sport motor races.The Mille Miglia tradition is now kept alive by the &quot; Historic Mille Miglia &quot;, { Official Mille Miglia website } a world-class event that gathers in Brescia every year thousands of fans of motor sports and of vintage sports cars. The only cars admitted to the race are the ones that could have competed in (although they do not necessarily have to have taken part in) the original Mille Miglia. The race nowadays is not however a speed race anymore, but rather a &quot; regularity &quot; race; speed races have actually been banned on regular roads in Italy because of the deadly accident that killed a driver and ten bystanders in the last minutes of the 1957 Mille Miglia - that therefore became the last of the original races. Brescia is also the home of the Brescia Calcio football club and the Rugby Leonessa 1928. [ Famous citizens ] Marcus Nonius Macrinus, Roman general and consul to Emperor Marcus Aurelius Rothari or Rotari, King of the Lombards Rodoald or Rodoaldo, King of the Lombards Desiderius, King of the Lombards Louis II, Holy Roman Emperor, Frankish emperor and King of Italy Arnold of Brescia, a dissident monk who lived in the 12th century Albertanus of Brescia, 13th century Latin author Veronica Gambara (1485–1550), poet and stateswoman. Giovanni Paoli (Juan Pablos), who brought the printing press to the new world in Mexico City under the viceroyalty of Antonio de Mendoza from Spain in 1535 Saint Angela Merici, who founded the Order of Ursulines in Brescia in 1535 Gasparo da Salò, b. 1540, d. 1609 - pioneer of violin making Niccolò Fontana Tartaglia, mathematician in the 16th century Giulio Alenio, (Brescia 1582- Yanping 1649) Jesuit missionary called the &quot; Confucius from the West &quot; Francesco Lana de Terzi (1631–1687), aeronautics and braille pioneer Benedetto Castelli, mathematician and expert in hydraulics in the early 17th century Paris Francesco Alghisi (1666–1733), composer Pietro Gnocchi 1689–1775, eccentric polymath and composer Bartolomeo Beretta, gunsmith and founder of the Beretta firearm company Giuseppe Zanardelli, b. 1826, d. 1903 - jurisconsult, politician, prime minister of the Kingdom of Italy (February 15, 1901 – November 3, 1903) Saint Maria Crocifissa di Rosa, who founded the Handmaids of Charity order of nuns in Brescia in 1840 Camillo Golgi experimental pathologist, b. 1843, d. 1926, who received the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1906 for his studies of the structure of the nervous system Arturo Benedetti Michelangeli, a pianist of the 20th century Pope Paul VI, born Giovanni Battista Montini (1897–1978). Guglielmo Achille Cavellini (1914–1990), art collector and artist Andrea Pirlo, football player Mario Balotelli, football player Manuel Belleri, football player Giacomo Agostini b. 1942, world-famous Grand Prix motorcycle racer and World Champion 1964–1977 Marco Cassetti, football player Sergio Scariolo, basketball coach L&apos;Aura, b.1984 - singer-songwriter [ International relations ] In Brazil there is a town called Nova Bréscia. This name was given by its first citizens, who were from Brescia. [ List of twin towns and sister cities in Italy ] [ Twin towns—Sister cities ] Brescia is twinned with: [ Germany ] [ Lithuania ] [ Spain ] [ Mexico ] [ China ] Darmstadt, Germany (1991) Town Twinnings and international relations (from the official city website. Accessed 2008-08-11.) Kaunas, Lithuania Logroño, Spain Toluca, Mexico Shenzhen, China [ See also ] Bishopric of Brescia University of Brescia Congregation of the Holy Family of Nazareth [ Brescia ] [ Sources ] [ References ] Notes [ 30em ] [ External links ] [ Brescia ] University of Brescia official site Catholic University of Brescia Just some news about Brescia Category:Cities and towns in Lombardy [ lmo ] ar:بريشا be:Горад Брэшыя bg:Бреша br:Brescia ca:Brescia cs:Brescia co:Brescia da:Brescia de:Brescia et:Brescia el:Μπρέσια eml:Brësa es:Brescia eo:Breŝo eu:Brescia fa:برشا fr:Brescia gl:Brescia ko:브레시아 hr:Brescia io:Brescia id:Brescia it:Brescia he:ברשה ka:ბრეშა sw:Brescia la:Brixia lv:Breša lt:Breša lmo:Brèsa hu:Brescia ms:Brescia nl:Brescia (stad) ja:ブレシア nap:Brescia no:Brescia nn:Brescia oc:Breissa pnb:بریسیا pms:Bressia pl:Brescia pt:Bréscia ro:Brescia qu:Brescia ru:Брешиа sc:Brescia scn:Brescia simple:Brescia sk:Brescia (mesto) sl:Brescia sr:Бреша sh:Brescia fi:Brescia sv:Brescia tl:Lungsod ng Brescia roa-tara:Brescia th:เบรชชา tr:Brescia uk:Брешія vec:Bressa vi:Brescia vo:Brescia war:Brescia zh:布雷西亚