A geared steam locomotive is a type of steam locomotive which uses reduction gearing in the drivetrain, as opposed to the common directly driven design. The locomotives use conventional adhesion to provide traction and therefore should not be confused with rack railway locomotives which drive a cog along a rack to provide traction. [ Explanation and rationale ] The steam locomotive, as commonly employed, has its piston s directly attached to crank s on the driving wheel s; thus, there is no gearing, one revolution of the driving wheels is equivalent to one revolution of the crank and thus two power strokes per piston (steam locomotives are almost universally double-acting, unlike the more familiar internal combustion engine ). The maximum rotational speed is fairly fixed for a given engine technology. Given the lack of any variable-ratio transmission between the piston engine and the wheels, the designer is forced to compromise between desired torque and desired maximum speed; the radius of the driving wheels determines this. The radius of the crank affixed to the wheel is of course less than this; its radius determines the length of the piston stroke. This cannot be too large, for the locomotive will be unable to generate enough steam to supply those large cylinders at speed; it cannot be too small, or the starting torque and thus tractive effort will be too small, and the locomotive will not be able to start a train. Many applications required a low speed locomotive with ample starting tractive effort – industrial use, mines and quarries and logging operations, steeply graded lines and the like – especially when the track is cheaply built and not suited to high speeds anyway. Unfortunately, although the trade-off of speed versus torque can be adjusted in favour of torque and tractive effort by reducing the size of the driving wheels, there is a practical limit below which this cannot be done without making the piston stroke too short on a directly driven locomotive. The solution is to separate the crank from the wheels, firstly allowing for a reasonable piston stroke and crank radius without requiring larger than desired driving wheels, and secondly allowing for reduction in rotational speed via gearing. Such a locomotive is a geared locomotive. Most were and are still single speed, but some did employ a variable-ratio gearbox and multiple ratios. [ Types of geared locomotive ] The vast majority of geared locomotives in the world were built to one of three distinct designs, whether licensed and official, or clones built after the expiration of key patents. Of the types, the Shay locomotive was the most numerous and best known. The overwhelming majority operated on the North America n continent, but with a number in use in various parts of South America and a fair number in Australia and New Zealand, including home-developed types. Class C Shay (three driven trucks) [ The Shay locomotive ] The Shay locomotive, features an offset boiler with a multiple-cylinder engine affixed to it on the opposite side, driving a longitudinal shaft geared to the axles via bevel gears (see also Ephraim Shay, inventor). { Class B Climax locomotive } [ The Climax locomotive ] { The Class B } { Climax locomotive, has two inclined cylinders driving a transverse crankshaft, geared to a longitudinal driveshaft placed centrally on the locomotive and driving the powered trucks via internal gearing. } There was also an earlier Class A Climax with a vertically mounted marine-type steam engine, working through a similar drive-line, via a two-speed gearbox. [ The Heisler locomotive ] A Heisler locomotive — note cylinder location The Heisler locomotive, has a &apos;Vee-Twin&apos; style steam engine, one cylinder each side of the boiler, affixed to a centrally located longitudinal driveshaft, again geared to the wheels. [ Clones and Variants ] Besides the three main designs mentioned, there were other designs and clones: [ http://www.lner.info/locos/Y/y10.shtml LNER Encyclopedia article on Sentinel class Y10 ] The Willamette locomotive was an improved-upon clone of the Shay locomotive produced in limited number by Willamette Iron &amp; Steel (better known for their steam donkey engine s ) after key patents expired. West coast logging customers were clamoring for improvements in detail design and the application of more modern locomotive technology to the geared locomotive; Lima (manufacturers of the Shay) were dragging their heels. The Willamette was the response to that. The Kitson-Still locomotive used different ends of the same cylinders for steam or diesel propulsion. The crank was above the frame and a gear train of fixed reduction linked it to the centre axle. Aveling and Porter built some geared locomotives which were, essentially, traction engine s with flange d wheels. The early ones used sprocket chain drive but later versions had spur gears. The Avonside Engine Company produced a small number of narrow gauge geared steam locomotives for sugar cane plantations in Natal. These were similar in design to Heislers. The Sentinel Waggon Works built numerous geared shunting locomotives to several designs. These combined high-pressure boilers with high-reduction gearing to provide high torque at low speeds. A &amp; G Price of Thames, New Zealand built a number of geared locomotives, often home-grown variants of the Climax A, Climax B or Heisler types. They did however produce a type that is known as the &quot; 16-wheeler &quot; ( an 0-4-4-4-4-0 type ) that was also produced by another NZ manufacturer, Johnson Brothers of Invercargill. [ Today ] With the decline of the commercial use of steam traction, the commercial use of geared locomotives has similarly reduced. Some geared steam locomotives are still at work in the sugar plantations of Indonesia, and no doubt elsewhere too, but in most countries they may now be seen only on tourist lines, preservation sites and museums. The particular advantage in cane sugar operations is the ability to use the dried solid residue of pressing the cane (see bagasse ) as a fuel of trivial cost, providing that low cost technical labor is available to maintain the locomotives. [ Australia ] Class B Climax, originally used on the Tyers Valley timber tramway which branched off the Moe-Walhalla railway east of Melbourne. Lima-built Shay locomotive from the Ali-shan railway in Taiwan, although it has not yet been restored. [ Canada ] The Canada Science and Technology Museum in Ottawa, Ontario has an operational 50 ton class B Shay Locomotive, that is in operation Sundays and Wednesdays in July and August. [ Indonesia ] Wide variety of types still in use at sugar mills. Most are long wheelbase 0-8-0 locomotives that use an articulation technique incorporating a geared drive to the outer-most axles, the inner pair being direct-drive. [ New Zealand ] Heisler, makers no.1494 (unrestored) Climax, makers no.1203 (under overhaul) Heisler, makers no.1063 (unrestored, parts supply) Heisler, makers no.1082 (awaiting overhaul) Climax, makers no.1650 (unrestored) Price Cb 117 (Class A Climax clone, restored) Price E 111 (Class B Climax clone, unrestored) Price V 148 (Heisler clone, under overhaul) Heisler, makers no.1450 (unrestored) Price Cb 113 (Class A Climax clone, restored) [ United Kingdom ] About 30 Sentinels have been preserved. A few examples are shown below: two Aveling &amp; Porters two Sentinels one Sentinel two Sentinels [ United States ] No geared steam locomotives remain in commercial use in America. However, several are in operation on tourist lines. The Cass Scenic Railroad State Park in West Virginia uses only geared locomotives, and featuring the largest remaining Shay locomotive, the 162-ton former Western Maryland Railway #6. The railroad also owns a Climax locomotive and a Heisler enabling all three types to be seen. The Roaring Camp and Big Trees Narrow Gauge Railroad in Felton, California has several operational Shays, a seldom –operated Heisler and a Climax awaiting restoration. The White Mountain Central Railroad at Clarks Trading Post in Lincoln, New Hampshire operates Climax #6 built in 1920 (builder number 1603) on its tourist line. Clarks also has the last remaining Shay in New England. The Shay is non-operational but in storage. Clark&apos;s also has a 32 ton Heisler Locomotive that is awaiting staybolt replacement. A 65-ton 1922 Lima locomotive with 3 truck Shay design is on static display at the Traveltown open air museum in Los Angeles. The Mt. Rainier Scenic Railroad A 99 ton West Fork Logging Heisler #91 is operational, a 70 ton Hillcrest Lumber Climax #10 is operational, a 95 ton Pickering Lumber Shay #11 is awaiting boiler work, and a 75 ton Rayonier Company Willamette #2 is operational and is the only Willamette operating [ See also ] Cass Scenic Railroad Steam donkey Steam locomotive nomenclature [ References ] [ External links ] ShayLocomotives.com The Geared Steam Locomotive Works SteamLocomotive.com Category:log transport de:Getriebelokomotive fr:Locomotive à engrenages ja:ギアードロコ