[ January 2010 ] [ 198.43 sqkm on ] [ 00ME ] [ 00ME ] [ 29UQ ] Royal Borough of Windsor and Maidenhead Windsor and Maidenhead Geography Status: Unitary, Royal Borough Region : South East England Ceremonial County: Berkshire Area : - Total Ranked 00ME Admin. HQ: Maidenhead Chief Executive Officer: Ian Threnholm ONS code : 00ME Demographics Population : - Total ( ) - Density Ranked 00ME / km² Ethnicity: Population estimates 90.2% White 5.4% S.Asian 1.2% Black 1.7% Mixed Race 1.4% Chinese or Other Politics The Royal Borough of Windsor and Maidenhead http://www.rbwm.gov.uk/ Leadership : Leader &amp; Cabinet Executive: MPs : Adam Afriyie, Theresa May The Royal Borough of Windsor and Maidenhead is a Royal Borough of Berkshire, in South East England. It became a unitary authority on 1 April 1998. It is home to Windsor Castle, Eton College, Legoland and Ascot Racecourse. The borough was formed on 1 April 1974 as a non-metropolitan district of Berkshire, under the Local Government Act 1972, from parts of the former administrative counties of Berkshire and Buckinghamshire. From Berkshire came the boroughs of Maidenhead and Windsor, and the rural districts of Cookham and Windsor, and from Buckinghamshire came the Eton urban district, and the parishes of Datchet, Horton and Wraysbury from the rural district of Eton. { The English Non-metropolitan Districts (Definition) Order 1972. SO 1972/2039. } It inherited royal borough status from Windsor, the site of Windsor Castle. During 2009 the Royal Borough&apos;s Youth Cabinet, along with other local authorities within Berkshire agreed to set up a new Local Authority within Berkshire, responsible for Youth Rights and Youth Services. The &apos; Berkshire County Youth Council&apos; has developed to now include Slough Borough Council. It gained unitary authority status in 1998 with the abolition of Berkshire County Council. { The Berkshire (Structural Change) Order 1996. SI 1996/1879 } [ Towns and villages ] The Royal Borough of Windsor and Maidenhead contains the following towns and villages Ascot Bray Clewer Cookham Datchet Eton Eton Wick Horton Maidenhead North Ascot (part) Old Windsor South Ascot Sunningdale Sunninghill Waltham St. Lawrence White Waltham Windsor Wraysbury [ Politics ] [ Westminster ] The Royal Borough is represented at Westminster by two Members of Parliament of the Conservative Party : Adam Afriyie ( Windsor ) and Theresa May ( Maidenhead ). The UK Parliament ary constituency of Maidenhead has been held by the Conservative Party since its creation in 1997, while the UK Parliamentary constituency of Windsor has been held by the Conservative Party since its creation in 1874. The two seats are considered to be safe Conservative seats. [ Local government ] [ Windsor and Maidenhead local elections ] The Royal Borough is currently under a Conservative administration. Elections for councillors to the Royal Borough take place every four years; the last took place in 2011. The political control of the Royal Borough is as follows: Party in control Years Conservative 1973–1991 No overall control 1991–1995 Liberal Democrats 1995–1997 No overall control 1997–2003 Liberal Democrats 2003–2007 Conservative 2007–present The 23 wards of the Royal Borough are represented by 57 councillors as follows: Ward Party Councillor(s) Ascot and Cheapside Conservative David Hilton, Duncan McBride Belmont Conservative Sinead Abbott, Phil Love, Marion Mills Bisham and Cookham Conservative Richard Kellaway, Michael Saunders, John Stretton Boyn Hill Conservative Christian Harris, Paul Lion, Claire Stretton Bray Conservative David Burbage, David Coppinger, Leo Walters Castle Without Mixed George Bathurst (Con), Catherine Bursnall ( UKIP ), Sue Evans (Con) Clewer East Mixed Tom Bursnall (UKIP), Eileen Quick (Con) Clewer North West Windsor Residents’ Association Cynthia Endacott, John Fido, John Penfold Clewer South Conservative James Evans, Simon Meadowcroft Cox Green Conservative Paul Brimacombe, Clive Bullock, Alan Mellins Datchet Conservative Jesse Grey, Gary Muir Eton and Castle Liberal Democrats George Fussey Eton Wick Conservative Peter Lawless Furze Platt Conservative Mohammed Ilyas, Hari Sharma, Derek Sharp Horton and Wraysbury Conservative John Lenton, Colin Rayner Hurley and Walthams Conservative Carwyn Cox, David Evans, Maureen Hunt Maidenhead Riverside Conservative Simon Dudley, Andrew Jenner, Adam Smith Oldfield Conservative Geoffrey Hill, Asghar Majeed, Derek Wilson Old Windsor Old Windsor Residents’ Association Malcolm Beer, Lynne Jones Park Conservative Natasha Airey, Phillip Bicknell Pinkneys Green Mixed Wilson Hendry (Con), Charles Hollingsworth (Con), Kathy Newbound (LD) Sunningdale Conservative Christine Bateson, Sayonara Luxton Sunninghill and South Ascot Conservative Peter Comber, John Story, Lynda Yong Since the election, Councillors Tom and Catherine Bursnall have switched allegance from the Conservative party to the UK Independence Party. { http://www.general-election-2010.co.uk/uk-party-political-news/tory-couple-latest-in-switch-to-ukip } [ Parish and town councils ] There are 14 parish councils and 1 town council in the borough. They are: Bisham, Bray, Cookham, Cox Green, Datchet, Eton (town), Horton, Hurley, Old Windsor, Shottesbrooke, Sunningdale, Sunninghill and Ascot, Waltham St Lawrence, White Waltham, Wraysbury. The towns of Maidenhead and Windsor are unparished. [ Twin towns ] The Royal Borough of Windsor and Maidenhead is twinned with the following Towns: [ France ] [ France ] [ Germany ] [ Germany ] [ Italy ] [ Belgium ] Neuilly-sur-Seine, France - established 1955 with Royal Borough of New Windsor. Saint-Cloud, France - established 1957 with Maidenhead. Bad Godesberg, Germany - established 1960 with Maidenhead. Goslar, Germany - established 1969 with Royal Borough of New Windsor. Frascati, Italy - established 1972 with Maidenhead. Kortrijk, Belgium - established 1981 with Royal Borough of Windsor and Maidenhead. [ References ] [ 51 28 N 0 40 W title region:GB_type:adm1st_source:GNS-enwiki ] Category:1974 establishments in England Category:Unitary authorities of England Category:Local government in Berkshire Category:Local authorities adjoining the River Thames Category:Local government districts of South East England Category:English district articles with deprecated infobox Category:Places with royal patronage in England ang:Windlesora &amp; Mægþenhȳþ bg:Уиндзор и Мейдънхед de:Windsor and Maidenhead eo:Windsor and Maidenhead fr:Windsor and Maidenhead it:Royal Borough of Windsor and Maidenhead nl:Windsor and Maidenhead no:Windsor and Maidenhead pl:Windsor and Maidenhead ro:Windsor and Maidenhead ru:Виндзор и Мэйденхэд sv:Royal Borough of Windsor and Maidenhead tr:Windsor and Maidenhead zh:溫莎-梅登黑德