[ April 2012 ] Johann Stamitz Jan Václav Antonín Stamic (later, during his life in Mannheim, Germanized as Johann Wenzel Anton Stamitz; June 18, 1717, Deutschbrod, Bohemia – March 27, 1757, Mannheim, Electorate of the Palatinate ) was a Czech composer and violin ist. Johann was the father of Carl Stamitz and Anton Stamitz, also composers. His music reflects the transition of the baroque period to the classical era. [ Life ] Stamitz spent the academic year 1734–1735 at the University of Prague. After only one year, he left the university to pursue a career as a violin virtuoso. Stamitz&apos; activities during the six-year period between his departure from the university in 1735 and his appointment in Mannheim around 1741 are not precisely known. Stamitz was appointed by the Mannheim court either in 1741 or 1742. Most likely, his engagement at Mannheim resulted from contacts made during the Bohemian campaign and coronation of Carl Albert ( Karl VII ), a close ally of the Elector Electorate of the Palatinate. In January 1742 Stamitz performed at Mannheim as part of the festivities surrounding the marriage of Karl Theodor, who succeeded his uncle Karl Philipp as Elector Palatine less than a year later; Karl Albert of Bavaria was a guest at the wedding. Stamitz was married on July 1, 1744 to Maria Antonia Luneborn. They had five children together, Carl Philipp, Maria Francisco, Anton Thadäus Nepomuk, and two children who died in infancy. Probably around the late summer of 1754, Stamitz took a year-long journey to Paris, perhaps at the invitation of the musical patron Alexandre Le Riche de La Poupelinière, with whom he stayed; Stamitz appeared in public in Paris for the first time at a Concert Spirituel of September 8, 1754. Stamitz&apos; success in Paris induced him to publish his Orchestral Trios, Op. 1, and possibly other publications with various Parisian publishers. Stamitz probably returned to Mannheim around the autumn of 1755, dying there in spring 1757, less than two years later, at the age of 39. The entry of his death reads: [ (March 30, 1757. Buried, Jo’es Stainmiz, director of court music, so expert in his art that his equal will hardly be found. Rite provided) ] [ Compositions ] Stamitz’s most important compositions are his 58 symphonies and his 10 orchestral trios. The orchestral trios, although frequently classified as symphonies, are actually somewhere between the symphony and the chamber trio, and may be played with or without doubling of parts. Stamitz was also a composer of concertos. These include, in addition to his numerous violin concertos, two for harpsichord, 12 for flute, one for oboe, and one for clarinet - among the earliest concertos for the instrument ( Johann Melchior Molter &apos;s six from the 1740s seem to have been the first [ May 2009 ] ). He also composed a large amount of chamber music for various instrumental combinations, as well as eight vocal works including his widely circulated concert Mass in D. Due to at least five other musicians of the 18th century bearing the surname Stamitz, including four from Johann’s immediate family, any attempt to catalog Stamitz’s works is risky at best, principally in view of the many variations in spelling. Actually, few difficulties arise in distinguishing between works by Johann Stamitz and those of his sons Carl and Anton. By contrast, the relationship of the names ‘Steinmetz’ and ‘Stamitz’ has caused substantial confusion, as at least two other musicians called ‘Steinmetz’ lived in the 18th century. [ May 2009 ] [ Innovations in the Classical symphony ] Stamitz expanded the orchestral score, making the winds essential for the composition. His symphonies of the 1750s are scored for eight parts; four strings, two horns, two oboes, although flutes and clarinets may substitute. Horns not only provided a harmonic backdrop for strings, but solo lines as well, and he was also one of the first composers to write independent lines for oboes. The chief innovation in Stamitz&apos;s symphonic works is their adoption of the cycle of four movements, with a fast/slow pair followed by a minuet and trio in the third movement, ending with a Presto or Prestissimo movement. While isolated examples of this structure exist previously, Stamitz was the first composer to use it consistently: well over half of his symphonies and nine of his ten orchestral trios are in four movements. He also contributed to the development of sonata form, most often used in the first movements of symphonies. Stamitz also adapted and extended traits originally developed in the Italian opera in his compositions. He added features in his pieces such as extended crescendo passages and other dynamic effects. Stamitz also incorporated simplified tutti chordal textures, sectionally specialized scores, and slow harmonic motion. Like Italian operas, Stamitz&apos;s compositions have a strong sense of rhythmic drive and distinctive thematic material within the exposition. [ See also ] :Category:Compositions by Johann Stamitz [ References ] Johann Stamitz Biography and works for viola d&apos;amore &apos;Johann (Wenzel Anton) [Jan Waczlaw (Václav) Antonin (Antonín)] Stamitz&apos;, Grove Music Online ed. L. Macy, &lt; http://www.grovemusic.com &gt; Wolf, Eugene K. The Symphonies of Johann Stamitz: A Study in the Formation of the Classic Style. Bohn, Scheltema &amp; Holkema 1981 ISBN 90-313-0346-1 Wright, Craig, Bryan Simms. Music in Western Civilization: Volume B – The Baroque and Classical Eras Thompson Schirmer 2006 ISBN 0-495-00868-0 [ External links ] [ Stamitz, Johann ] [ Stamitz, Johann Stamitz, Johann Wenzel Anton Czech composer and violinist 18 June 1717 Německý Brod, Czechia 27 March 1757 Mannheim ] Category:1717 births Category:1757 deaths Category:Classical era composers Category:Czech composers Category:Czech expatriates Category:18th-century Czech people ca:Johann Stamitz cs:Jan Václav Stamic de:Johann Stamitz es:Johann Stamitz eu:Johann Stamitz fr:Johann Stamitz ko:요한 슈타미츠 id:Johann Stamitz it:Johann Stamitz he:יוהאן שטאמיץ nl:Jan Václav Antonín Stamic ja:ヨハン・シュターミッツ oc:Johann Wenzel Anton Stamitz pt:Johann Stamitz ru:Стамиц, Ян Вацлав Антонин sk:Jan Václav Stamic sl:Johann Stamitz fi:Jan Stamic sv:Johann Stamitz uk:Ян Вацлав Антонін Стаміц zh:约翰·斯塔米茨