[ Anole the comic book character Anole (comics) ] [ May 2010 ] [ Polychrotidae green_anole.jpg 250px Carolina Anole with dewlap extended Animal ia Chordata Reptilia Squamata Iguania Polychrotidae Genera * Anisolepis * Anolis * Chamaeleolis * Chamaelinorops * Ctenonotus - Eastern Antillean Anoles, Eastern Antillian Anoles * Dactyloa - South American anoles * Enyalius * Norops * Phenacosaurus * Polychrus * Urostrophus * Xiphosurus - Hispaniolan giant anole, Puerto Rican giant anole ] Polychrotidae is a family of lizard s commonly known as anoles ( [ icon ə ˈ n oʊ l iː z ] ). NCBI places the anole in subfamily Polychrotinae of the family Iguanidae. { NCBI Taxonomy Browser } Four genera are common: Anolis, Norops, Phenacosaurus, and Polychrus. Anole lizards are frequently and incorrectly called American chameleon s or gecko s, but they are not closely related to either of those groups. In fact, they are more closely related to iguanas. These misconceptions are likely due to their ability to alter their skin color and run up walls. [ Characteristics and distribution ] Anoles are small and common lizards that can be found throughout the southeastern United States, the Caribbean, and various other regions of the Western world. A large majority of them sport a green coloration, including the only species native to North America, the aptly named Green anole, although the green anole can change its color based on its mood and surroundings. Anoles are an exorbitantly diverse and plentiful group of lizards. There are currently about 372 known species. The Knight, Green, Bark Anole, Jamaican Giant anole, and Cuban Brown Anoles can all be found in the United States, primarily in Florida, although the most prevalent of these species by far is the Cuban brown anole, which has pushed the native green (or &quot; Carolina &quot; ) anole population farther north. Interestingly, when green anoles and brown anoles cohabit the same area, the brown anoles are primarily terrestrial or restrict themselves to the lower branches of bushes, while the green anoles stay higher. Brown anoles have also spread into East Texas. At a nursery in the Heights neighborhood of Houston, Texas, a stable population has established itself, hatchlings having been observed in the Spring of 2005. [ December 2007 ] All species of anole in the U.S. except the green anole were introduced through eggs nested in imported plants. [ December 2007 ] It is notable that while nearly all anoles can change their color, the extent and variations of this ability differ widely throughout the individual anole species. For example, the green anole can change its color from a bright, leafy green to a dull brown color, while the Cuban brown can only change its shade of brown, along with the patterns on its back. Anole out of hiding Many anoles are between 8 and 18  cm (3–7  inches) in length. Some larger species, such as the Knight Anole, can surpass [ 12 in mm ]; some males of the Knight Anole species can even reach [ 20 in mm ] in length. Anoles&apos; diets include live insect s and other invertebrate s, with crickets, spider s, and moth s being some of the most commonly consumed prey. Anoles are opportunistic feeders, and may attempt to eat any attractive meal that is small enough. The primary foods for captive anoles are small feeder crickets that can be purchased at most pet stores. Green Anole on railing These subtropical lizards are semi arboreal. They usually inhabit regions around 3–6 m (10–20  feet) high. Shrubs, walls, fences, bushes, and short trees are common hiding places. Most anoles are said to live between 4 and 8 years. Even anoles captured from the wild can live for several years if given acceptable living space and cared for properly—a healthy anole in captivity, being free from predators and natural disaster, may live well beyond seven years. [ December 2007 ] Some anoles may even reach 14 years with careful and proper care. Green anoles mating Breeding occurs for several months beginning in late spring. Males employ head bobbing and dewlap extension in courtship. 1–2 small, soft shell eggs are laid among leaf litter. More clutches may be laid before mating season has ended. Anole populations in each of the Martinique islands, despite remaining separate for an estimated six to eight million years, have not experienced significant evolution, and many mixed-island couples have successfully reproduced. [ How Important Is Geographical Isolation in Speciation? http://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2010/04/100429172956.htm ScienceDaily May 1, 2010 May 6, 2010 ] Anoles have many features that make them readily identifiable. They have a dewlap, made of erectile cartilage, that extends from the neck/throat area. Their toes are covered with structures that allow them to cling to many different surfaces. Also, their tails have the ability to break off at special segments in order to escape predators or fights. The tail itself continues to wriggle strongly for some minutes after detaching. This ability is known as autotomy. Anoles are also diurnal, which means that they are active during the daytime. Green Anole Close Up Some species of anoles exhibit sexual dimorphism, which allows one to discern between males and females fairly easily with the naked eye. In green anoles, the females are characterized by a pale dorsal stripe extending from neck to tail, generally smaller body, and a smaller head with a shorter snout. Female brown anoles share these characteristics, although their dorsal stripe is oftentimes wider with diamond-shaped or squiggly edges. This stripe may be present sometimes in males, especially young ones not yet fully grown, but it is always fainter with less defined edges. Some females have a small dewlap (pale and much smaller than those of the males); others not at all. [ Territory ] Anoles are very territorial. Although the lizards can grow up to 7  inches in a habitat, their territories are usually quite small: around three square yards, females&apos; usually smaller. Their territories often contain a basking area, a shady area, a high lookout, and always a place to hide from predators. They do not take kindly to other anoles in their territory. Often when an intruder is in the area, the anole raises its spine, fans its dewlap, and does &quot; push-ups &quot; accompanied by intermittent ultrasonic hisses. If this does not scare off the intruder, a fight proceeds in which the two anoles bite at each other&apos;s tails. If the anole loses (gives up) the intruder gains entrance, otherwise he leaves. Males rarely fight. Anoles have a wide range of territorial behavior from one head bob to a pressurized bite usually aimed for the snout or jaw of the lizard. When caught by a person they will tend to bite if agitated and require some effort to remove from skin. They very infrequently draw blood or cause injury. [ Relationship with humans ] Female Green Anole on fake plant in captivity Anoles function well as a native pest control as they will eat spiders, cockroaches, and other bugs and most will run from humans when possible, but some are aggressive enough to try to bite an imposing hand. At least eight species of non-native anoles have been introduced to Florida and other parts of the southeastern United States by humans { Meshaka, W. E. 2011. &apos;A Runaway Train in the Making: The Exotic Amphibians, Reptiles, Turtles, and Crocodilians of Florida Herpetological Conservation &amp; Biology 6:1-101. http://herpconbio.org/Volume_6/Monograph_1/Meshaka_2011.pdf }, including the Brown Anole. [ References ] [ External links ] Polychrotidae at the Reptile Database &quot; Breeding Green Anoles (Anolis Carolinensis) in Captivity &quot; &quot; Castaway Anole Lizards Put Evolution to the Test &quot; * Category:Lizards Category:Animals that can change color az:Anolislər bo:མདོག་འགྱུར་རྩངས་པ། de:Polychrotidae es:Polychrotidae fr:Polychrotidae la:Polychrotidae hu:Polychrotidae nl:Anolissen ja:アノールトカゲ科 no:Anoleøgler pl:Długonogwanowate pt:Polychrotidae ro:Polychrotidae ru:Анолисовые sv:Polychrotidae uk:Анолісові