[ the red hat the Moroccan city Fes ] { Fez } [ December 2009 May 2008 ] A fez The fez ( [ fes ], plural fezzes or fezes { Fez in Merriam-Webster&apos;s online dictionary } ), or tarboosh ( [ طربوش ] / [ tˤɑɾˤˈbuːʃ ], ALA-LC : ṭarbūsh), is a felt hat either in the shape of a truncated cone or of a short cylinder, made of kilim fabric, red in colour, usually with a tassel attached to the top. The fez is largely believed to be of Moroccan origin [ December 2011 ] and later spread to the Ottoman Empire where it was popularized. { Hilda Amphlett. Hats: a history of fashion in headwear. Mineola, New York, USA: Courier Dover Publications, 2003. } { Ibrahim Kaya. Social theory and later modernities: the Turkish experience. Liverpool, England, UK: Liverpool University Press, 2004. Pp. 119. } [ Origin and History ] { Sultan Mahmud II after his clothing reforms } The fez was developed to fashionable heights by Andalusian Arabs in the city of Fes, Morocco by the 17th century. The artisans involved in their making were the most selective members of the city&apos;s Souq s. In 1826 Sultan Mahmud II of the Ottoman Empire suppressed the Janissaries and began sweeping reforms of the military. His modernized military adopted Western style uniforms and, as hats, the fez with a cloth wrapped around it. In 1829, the Sultan ordered his civil officials to wear the plain fez, and also banned the wearing of turban s. { Jirousek, Charlotte. “Islamic Clothing.” In Encyclopedia of Islam. New York: Macmillan Pub. 2005. } The intention was to coerce the populace at large to update to the Fez, and the plan was successful. This was a radically egalitarian measure which replaced the elaborate sumptuary law s which signaled rank, religion, and occupation, allowing prosperous non-Muslims to express their wealth in competitions with Muslims, foreshadowing the Tanzimat reforms. Although tradesmen and artisans generally rejected the fez, { Donald Quataert, &quot; Clothing Laws, State, and Society in the Ottoman Empire, 1720-1829 &quot;, International Journal of Middle East Studies 29:3:403-425 (August 1997) at JSTOR } it became a symbol of modernity throughout the Near East, inspiring similar decrees in other nations (such as Iran in 1873.) { Jirousek, Charlotte. “Islamic Clothing.” In Encyclopedia of Islam. New York: Macmillan Pub. 2005. } To meet escalating demand, skilled fez makers were induced to immigrate from North Africa to Istanbul, where factories were established in the neighborhood of Eyup. Styles soon multiplied, with nuances of shape, height, material, and hue competing in the market. The striking scarlet and merlot colors of the Fez were initially achieved through an extract of cornel. However, the invention of low-cost synthetic dyes soon shifted production of the hat to the factories of Austria. The 1908 Austro-Hungarian annexation of Bosnia-Herzegovina, resulted in a boycott of Austrian goods which became known as the “Fez Boycott” due to the near monopoly the Austrians then held on production of the hat. Although the hat survived, the year-long boycott brought the end of its universality in the Ottoman Empire as other styles became socially acceptable. { &quot; Clothing and Fashion, Middle East (Western Colonialism), &quot; Website: What-When-How: In-depth Tutorials and Information. Retrieved: 13 May 2012. } Initially a symbol of Ottoman modernity, the fez over time came to be seen as part of an &quot; Oriental &quot; cultural identity. Seen as exotic &amp; romantic in the west, it enjoyed a vogue as part of men&apos;s luxury smoking outfit in the U.S. and U.K. in the decades surrounding the turn of the 20th century. The fez had become traditional to the point that Mustafa Kemal Ataturk banned it in Turkey in 1925 as part of his modernizing reforms. In his speech attacking Ottoman dress as decadent, he condemned the fez as &quot; the headcovering of Greeks &quot;, tarring it by association with the recent Greco-Turkish War. { Selim Deringil, &quot; The Invention of Tradition as Public Image in the Late Ottoman Empire, 1808 to 1908 &quot; Comparative Studies in Society and History 35:1 (January 1993), p. 9 } The fez was initially a brimless bonnet of red, white, or black with a turban woven around. Later the turban was eliminated, the bonnet shortened, and the color fixed to red. Praying while wearing a fez -instead of a hat with brim- was easier because Muslims put their foreheads on the ground many times during the prayer sessions. [ Etymology ] The name is originated from the city of Fez in Morocco, where the style first emerged. [ April 2011 ] [ Military use ] { Bedouin man wearing a } { North African version of the fez. } A version of the fez was used as an arming cap for the 1400-1700s version of the mail armour head protector (a round metal plate or skull-cap, around which hung a curtain of mail to protect the neck and upper shoulder. The fez, presumably padded, raised up the metal plate an inch or two to provide effective protection from heavy blows. The fez could be optionally wrapped with a turban. [ January 2011 ] { Tunisia. } The red fez with blue tassel was the standard headdress of the Turkish Army from the 1840s until the introduction of a khaki service dress and peakless sun helmet in 1910. The only significant exceptions were cavalry and some artillery units who wore a lambskin hat with coloured cloth tops. Albania n levies wore a white version of the fez. During World War I the fez was still worn by some naval reserve units and occasionally by soldiers when off duty. The Evzones (light infantry) regiments of the Greek Army wore their own distinctive version of the fez from 1837 until World War II. It now survives in the parade uniform of the Presidential Guard in Athens. From the late 19th century on the fez was widely adopted as the headdress of locally recruited &quot; native &quot; soldiers amongst the various colonial troops of the world. The French North African regiments ( Zouave s, Tirailleurs, and Spahis ) wore wide, red fezzes with detachable tassels of various colours. It was an off-duty affectation of the Zouaves to wear their fezzes at different angles according to the regiment; French officers of North African units during the 1930s often wore the same fez as their men, with rank insignia attached. The Libyan battalions and squadrons of the Italian colonial forces wore lower, red fezzes over white skull caps. Somali and Eritrea n regiments in Italian service wore high red fezzes with coloured tufts that varied according to the unit. German askaris in East Africa wore their fezzes with khaki covers on nearly all occasions. The Belgian Force Publique in the Congo wore large and floppy red fezzes similar to those of the French Tirailleurs Senegalais and the Portuguese Companhias Indigenas. The British King&apos;s African Rifles (recruited in East Africa) wore high straight-sided fezzes in either red or black, while the West African Frontier Force wore a low red version. The Egyptian Army wore the classic Turkish model until 1950. The West India Regiment of the British Army wore a fez as part of its Zouave -style full dress until this unit was disbanded in 1928. The tradition is continued in the full dress of the band of the Barbados Regiment, with a white turban wrapped around the base. While the fez was a colourful and picturesque item of uniform it was in several ways an impractical headdress. If worn without a drab cover it made the head a target for enemy fire, and it provided little protection from the sun. As a result it was increasingly relegated to parade or off-duty wear by World War II, although France&apos;s West African tirailleurs continued to wear a khaki-covered version in the field until about 1943. During the final period of colonial rule in Africa (approximately 1945 to 1962) the fez was seen only as a full-dress item in French, British, Belgian, Spanish and Portuguese African units; being replaced by wide-brimmed hats or forage caps on other occasions. Colonial police forces, however, usually retained the fez as normal duty wear for indigenous personnel. Post-colonial armies in Africa quickly discarded the fez. It is, however, still worn by the ceremonial Gardes Rouge in Senegal as part of their Spahi -style uniform, and by the Italian Bersaglieri in certain orders of dress. The Bersaglieri adopted the fez as an informal headdress through the influence of the French Zouave s, with whom they served in the Crimean War. The Italian Arditi in the First World War wore a black fez that later became a uniform of the Mussolini Fascist regime. The Spanish Regulares (formerly Moorish) Tabors stationed in the Spanish exclave s of Céuta and Melilla, in North Africa, retain a parade uniform which includes the fez and white cloaks. Filipino units organised in the early days of U.S. rule briefly wore black fezzes. The Liberian Frontier Force, although not a colonial force, wore fezzes until the 1940s. The 13th Waffen Mountain Division of the SS Handschar, which was recruited from Bosnia, used a red or field grey fez with Waffen SS cap insignia. Bosnian infantry regiments in the former Austro-Hungarian Empire had also been distinguished by wearing the fez until the end of World War I. Two regiments of the Indian Army recruited from Muslim areas wore fezzes under British rule (although the turban was the nearly-universal headdress amongst Hindu and Muslim sepoys and sowars). A green fez was worn by the Bahawalpur Lancers of Pakistan as late as the 1960s. Many volunteer Zouave regiments wore the French North African version of the fez during the American Civil War. [ International use ] { Peci, worn here by } { Indonesia n former president } { Suharto. } The fez is a part of the traditional clothing of Cyprus, and is still worn by some Cypriots today. Traditionally, women wore a red fez over their heads, instead of a headscarf, whilst men a black or red cap. { Spilling, Michael, &quot; Cyprus &quot;, p.55, (1999) ISBN 978-0-7614-0978-6 } The fez was sometimes worn by men with material (similar to a wrapped keffiyeh or turban ) around the base. In his 1811 journey to Cyprus, John Pinkerton describes the fez, &quot; a red cap turned up with fur &quot;, as &quot; the proper Greek dress &quot;. { Pinkerton, John, &quot; A general collection of... voyages and travels &quot;, pp.591-2 (1811) } In the Karpass Peninsula, white caps are worn, a style considered to be based on ancient Cypriot Hellenic- Phoenicia n attire, thus preserving men&apos;s head-wear from 2700 years earlier. { &quot; The Traditional Costumes of Cyprus &quot; } The fez was introduced into the Balkans, initially during the Byzantine reign, and subsequently during the Ottoman period where various Slavs, mostly Bosniaks, started wearing the head-wear. Among the Muslim aristocracy of South Asia, the fez is known as the Rumi Topi (which means &quot; hat of Rume or Byzantium &quot; ). { The “Rumi Topi” of Hyderabad, by Omair M. Farooqui, Esq. } It was a symbol of Islamic identity and showed the Indian Muslims&apos; support for the Caliphate, headed by the Ottoman Sultan. Later, it became associated with the Muslim League, the political party which eventually created the country of Pakistan. The late veteran Pakistani politician Nawabzada Nasrullah Khan was one of the few people in Pakistan who wore the fez until his death in 2003. In Sri Lanka the fez was used as frequently by the local Muslim Sri Lankan Moor population. Despite its use declining in popularity, the fez is still used in traditional Moor marriage ceremonies. A variation of the fez has been commonly worn in Maritime Southeast Asia since the 19th century when it was introduced by Muslims from South Asia. Known as a peci in Indonesian and songkok in Malaysian, this variant is black in colour with a more ellipse shape and sometimes decorated with embroideries. The Philippine varieties tend to be colorful and highly decorated. A variation of a black soft fez was used by Italian blackshirts under the Fascist regime. This was in imitation of the red soft fez worn by bersaglieri units. [ May 2012 ] In Libya, a soft black fez, called the checheya, is worn by the rural population with or without a long tassel. In the east, a red one called a chenna is worn. [ May 2012 ] In tourist hotels in Egypt, Tunisia and Morocco, porter s and bellhop s often wear a fez to provide local colour for visitors. [ April 2012 ] In the last era of the Ottoman Empire, a purple fez was used as a symbol of revolt by eshkiyas (bandits). [ May 2012 ] [ In Western popular culture ] [ July 2010 ] In contemporary Western media, the fez may serve as a semantic prop to imply that its wearer is very much &quot; off duty &quot; (e.g. a cartoon character may be pictured wearing a fez whilst lying in a hammock in some exotic location, or just relaxing after a hard day of work). This detail is possibly a nostalgic reference, reminiscent of a Victorian English eccentricity in which gentlemen were frequently, and stereotypically depicted (e.g. Punch cartoons of the period 1875–90) wearing a loose-fitting robe smoking jacket and braided fez-like smoking cap when relaxing informally at home. This custom was referred to as &quot; wearing mufti &quot; and originated from British Army officers and public servants opting to wear Indian dress of that period in the more leisurely setting of their homes. The dress was more comfortable in the Indian climate and created a sense of ease and relaxation such that the clothing, not unlike that of an Islamic scholar or mufti, came into the English language as a word meaning &apos;out of uniform&apos; or pertaining to their being out of their formal role. [ The TARDIS Index Files - Fez http://tardis.wikia.com/wiki/Fez ] The Shriners are notable for wearing fezzes. The character Howard Cunningham wore a fez as a member of the fictional fraternity The Leopard Lodge on the television series Happy Days. It was leopard skin with a tassel. http://freemasonry.bcy.ca/fiction/fraternities/clubs.html The British comedian-magician Tommy Cooper always wore a red fez during his act. Morocco Mole, the companion/sidekick of Secret Squirrel, is famously always clad in a fez. The BBC show, Doctor Who, has shown a few fezzes during its time. Some fez sightings include The Seventh Doctor in the 1988 episode, &quot; Silver Nemesis &quot; (Season 25), The Eighth Doctor in the 2003 Doctor Who comic, &quot; Doctor Who and the Nightmare Game &quot;, and most notably, The Eleventh Doctor, who sports a fez in the 2010 episode, &quot; The Big Bang &quot;. When asked &quot; What in the name of sanity have you got on your head? &quot; he answered, &quot; It&apos;s a fez. I wear a fez now. Fezzes are cool &quot;, to which it was promptly destroyed by Amy Pond and River Song. Later in the episode, the Doctor wakes up to find himself not wearing a fez, to which he says that he can buy one, after feeling his head. Then in the episode &apos;Death is the Only Answer&apos; he comes into possession of a fez owned by Albert Einstein. In Disney &apos;s Aladdin (1992), The Return of Jafar (1994) and Aladdin and the King of Thieves (1996), and on television in Aladdin: the Animated Series, Aladdin (Disney character), wears a red Fez on his head. Eclectic jazz-rock band &quot; Steely Dan &quot; have a song titled &quot; The Fez &quot;. [ See also ] [ Fez ] Kalpak - A similar Turkic head cap Gandhi cap Turban Keffiyeh Taqiyah (cap) Shriners Moorish Science Temple of America Turkish cap Doctor Who [ References ] Category:Hats Category:Caps Category:Arabic clothing Category:Islamic dress (male) Category:Algerian clothing Category:Tunisian clothing Category:Ottoman clothing Category:Moroccan clothing Category:Turkish clothing Category:History of Asian clothing ar:طربوش az:Fəs be:Феска bg:Фес (шапка) bs:Fes ca:Fes (lligadura) cs:Fez da:Fez (hovedbeklædning) de:Fes (Kopfbedeckung) es:Fez (ropa) eo:Fezo fr:Fez (coiffure) ko:뻬즈 hy:Ֆես hr:Fes (odjevni predmet) io:Fezo it:Fez (abbigliamento) he:תרבוש ku:Fes (serpoş) mrj:Фескы lv:Feska lt:Fesas (kepurė) nl:Fez (hoofddeksel) ja:フェズ (帽子) no:Fess (hodeplagg) pl:Fez (czapka) pt:Fez (chapéu) ru:Феска simple:Fez sl:Fes sr:Фес (капа) sh:Fes fi:Fetsi sv:Fez tr:Fes (başlık) uk:Феска vo:Fes zh:土耳其毯帽