[ 8th novel – 1st City Watch story center Samuel Vimes Fred Colon Nobby Nobbs Carrot Ironfoundersson Havelock Vetinari Ankh-Morpork Cop novels Film Noir Show dog (dragon) breeding Nobility / Monarchy Secret Societies The Hobbit, particularly Smaug. 1989 Corgi ISBN 0-575-04606-6 ISBN 0-552-13462-7 Came 69th in the Big Read. BBC - The Big Read - Top 100 Books April 2003, Retrieved 2009-05-9 The first &apos;&apos;Discworld&apos;&apos; computer game borrowed heavily from this story. Adapted as a play by Stephen Briggs. ] Guards! Guards! is the eighth Discworld novel by Terry Pratchett, first published in 1989. { Fantastic Fiction Guards! Guards! (Discworld, book 8) Terry Pratchett Retrieved 2009-05-9 } It is the first novel about the City Watch. The first &apos;&apos;Discworld&apos;&apos; computer game borrowed heavily from Guards! Guards! in terms of plot. { BBC - h2g2 - Terry Pratchett&apos;s Discworld - the Computer Game Retrieved 2009-05-9 } [ Plot ] The story follows a plot by a secret brotherhood, the Unique and Supreme Lodge of the Elucidated Brethren of the Ebon Night, to overthrow the Patrician of Ankh-Morpork and install a puppet king, under the control of the Supreme Grand Master (Vetinari&apos;s secretary, Lupine Wonse ). Using a stolen magic book, they summon a dragon to strike fear into the people of Ankh-Morpork. Once a suitable state of terror and panic has been created, the Supreme Grand Master proposes to put forth an &quot; heir &quot; to the throne, who will slay the dragon and rid the city of tyranny. It is the task of the Night Watch – Captain Vimes, Sergeant Colon, Corporal Nobbs, and new volunteer Carrot Ironfoundersson – to stop them, with some help from the Librarian of the Unseen University, an orangutan trying to get the stolen book back. The Watch is in bad condition; they are regarded as a bunch of incompetents who just walk around ringing their bells, and this is mostly true. The arrival of Carrot changes this; Carrot has memorised the Laws and Ordinances of the Cities of Ankh and Morpork, and on his first day tries to arrest the head of the Thieves&apos; Guild for theft (the Thieves&apos; Guild is permitted a quota of legally licensed thieving, a concept that the book of ancient Laws does not take into account). Carrot&apos;s enthusiasm strikes a chord with Vimes; the Watch should prevent crime, not ignore it. Vimes begins investigating the dragon&apos;s appearances, which leads to an acquaintance with Sybil Ramkin, a breeder of swamp dragon s. Ramkin gives an underdeveloped dragon, Errol, to the Watch as a mascot. The leader of the Elucidated Brethren is initially successful in controlling the dragon, but he has not accounted for the dragon&apos;s own abilities. The banished dragon returns, and makes itself king of Ankh-Morpork (keeping the head of the Elucidated Brethren as its mouthpiece) and demands that the people of Ankh-Morpork bring it gold and regular virgin sacrifice s. Shortly after, Vimes is imprisoned in the same cell as the Patrician, who has been leading a relatively comfortable life with the help of the rat s he uses as spies. The Librarian helps Vimes to escape and he runs to the aid of Sybil, who has been chosen as the first virgin to be sacrificed. The Watch&apos;s swamp dragon, Errol, reorganises his digestive system to form a supersonic jet engine and fights the king, eventually knocking the king out of the sky with a shock wave. As the assembled crowd closes in on the king for the kill, Sybil tries to plead for its life. Carrot instead places it under arrest, however Errol lets the dragon escape, revealing that the dragon is in fact female, the battle between the two in fact being a courtship ritual. Sam Vimes proceeds to arrest Lupine Wonse, but accidentally causes the man&apos;s death when he told Carrot to &quot; throw the book at him. &quot; The man was attempting to summon another dragon, and died from falling off a broken floor after being hit by the Laws and Ordinances of Ankh-Morpork. The Patrician is reinstated as ruler of Ankh-Morpork, and offers the Watch anything they want as a reward. They ask only for a modest pay raise, a new tea kettle and a dartboard. [ Adaptations ] The novel has been adapted as: a 6-episode serial on BBC Radio 4 (23 Nov. - 28 Dec. 1992) dramatised by Michael Butt and starring John Wood (Vimes), Melvyn Hayes (Nobby), Robert Gwilym (Carrot), Crawford Logan (Vetinari), Helen Atkinson-Wood (Lady Ramkin), Brett Usher (Supreme Grand Master), Martin Jarvis (narrator). The L-Space Web Events: Radio: Guards Guards Retrieved 2009-05-9 a stage play for the amateur stage scripted by Stephen Briggs (1993) (script later published in book form 1997). Doollee - The Playwrights Database Stephen Briggs - complete guide to the Playwright, Plays, Theatres, Agent Retrieved 2009-05-9 a professional stage play scripted by Geoffrey Cush and starring Paul Darrow (1998). The L-Space Web Plays: Guards! Guards!: 1998 Retrieved 2009-05-9 a &quot; Big Comic &quot; ( Graphic novel ) drawn by Graham Higgins and based on Briggs&apos; script (2000). Amazon.co.uk Guards! Guards!: A Discworld Graphic Novel Retrieved 2009-05-9 an audio play presented live at Dragon*Con in 2001, adapted by David Benedict and performed by the ARTC (Atlanta Radio Theatre Company). ARTC&apos;s Podcast Retrieved 2009-05-9 In appreciation, the ARTC made a donation to the Orangutan Foundation International. ARTC&apos;s Podcast Retrieved 2009-05-9 a video game loosely based on the plot of the book, with Rincewind substituted for Sam Vimes. a Board Game - officially launched at Titancon, Belfast 24 September 2011 by Backspindle Games (Designers: Leonard Boyd &amp; David Brashaw) in conjunction with Z-Man Games, USA. The game includes 90 character Discworld character illustrations drawn by Stephen Player and respective text quotes from over twenty Discworld novels. [ Translations ] Стражите! Стражите! (Bulgarian) Stráže! Stráže! (Czech) Wacht! Wacht! (Dutch) Vahid! Vahid! (Estonian) Vartijat, hoi! (Finnish) Au Guet ! (French) Wachen! Wachen! (German) שומרים! שומרים! (Shomrim! Shomrim!) (Hebrew) Őrség! Őrség! (Hungarian) A me le guardie! (Italian) I lovens navn! (In the name of the law) (Norwegian) Straż! Straż! (Polish) Guardas! Guardas! (Portuguese - Brazil) Gărzi! Gărzi! (Romanian) Стража! Стража! (Russian) Straža! Straža! (Serbian) ¡Guardias! ¿Guardias? (Spanish) I lagens namn (In the name of the law) (Swedish) [ References ] [ External links ] [ Discworld#Guards! Guards! Guards! Guards! ] Annotations for &apos;&apos;Guards! Guards!&apos;&apos; Quotes from &apos;&apos;Guards! Guards!&apos;&apos; ! colspan= &quot; 3 &quot; | Reading order guide [ Pyramids 8th Discworld Novel Faust Eric ] [ None 1st City Watch Story Published in 1989 Theatre of Cruelty ] Category:1989 novels Category:Discworld books Category:Comedy novels Category:Fantasy novels Category:1980s fantasy novels bg:Стражите! Стражите! cs:Stráže! Stráže! cy:Guards! Guards! es:¡Guardias! ¿Guardias? fr:Au guet ! it:A me le guardie! he:שומרים! שומרים! nl:Wacht! Wacht! pl:Straż! Straż! ro:Gărzi! Gărzi! ru:Стража! Стража! fi:Vartijat hoi!