[ September 2009 ] Not to be confused with Tom Newman [ yes 1955 10 20 ] { Los Angeles, California, U.S. } { Composer } { Best Original Score1997 } { Oscar and Lucinda } { Best Film Music 1999 } { American Beauty } { Outstanding Main Title Theme Music2001 } { Six Feet Under } { Best Score Soundtrack Album for a Motion Picture, Television or Other Visual Media 2001 } { American Beauty } { non_performing_personnel } Thomas Montgomery Newman (born October 20, 1955) is an American composer and conductor, best known for his many film scores. Newman has received a total of ten Academy Award nominations, although as of 2011, he has yet to win the award. He has however won a BAFTA, two Grammys and an Emmy, and has been nominated for a Golden Globe. Newman was honored with the Richard Kirk award at the 2000 BMI Film and TV Awards. The award is given annually to a composer who has made significant contributions to film and television music. [ http://www.bmi.com/news/entry/233494 Richard Kirk Award: Thomas Newman Fulfills the Promise of His Legacy bmi.com 2010-11-03 ] [ Early life ] Born in Los Angeles, California, he was the youngest son of Mississippi-born Martha Louise (née Montgomery) and composer Alfred Newman. He is a member of a film-scoring dynasty in Hollywood that includes his father, brother David Newman, sister Maria Newman, uncles Lionel Newman and Emil Newman, cousin Randy Newman (who is also known as a singer and songwriter) and his nephew Joey Newman. Newman was educated at Yale University before starting his career in music. [ Film scoring career ] His first major score was for the 1984 film Reckless. In 1999, Newman composed the score to Sam Mendes &apos; first feature film American Beauty, created using mainly percussion instruments. Newman believed the score helped move the film along without disturbing the &quot; moral ambiguity &quot; of the script, saying &quot; It was a real delicate balancing act in terms of what music worked to preserve that. &quot; This was his first collaboration with Mendes, and he would go on to score all of the director&apos;s subsequent films except for Away We Go. He received a fourth Oscar nomination for this score, and although he lost again (to John Corigliano for The Red Violin ), he did receive a Grammy and a BAFTA. His critical and commercial success has continued in recent years with his scores for films such as The Green Mile, Erin Brockovich, In the Bedroom, and The Salton Sea. He was nominated consecutively for a further three Academy Awards, for Road to Perdition (2002), Finding Nemo (2003), and Lemony Snicket&apos;s A Series of Unfortunate Events (2004). However, he lost on each occasion, to Elliot Goldenthal (for Frida ), Howard Shore (for The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King ), and Jan A. P. Kaczmarek (for Finding Neverland ) respectively. He was again nominated for an Oscar for scoring Steven Soderbergh &apos;s The Good German (2006). At the Oscar ceremony, he appeared in the opening segment by Errol Morris, who jokingly stated that Newman had been nominated for and failed to win an Oscar eight times. Newman replied: &quot; No, I&apos;ve failed seven but this will be my eighth &quot;, and indeed, he again lost, this time to Gustavo Santaolalla for Babel. His first score since The Good German was for the 2008 animated film WALL-E, collaborating for the second time with director Andrew Stanton (with the first collaboration being Finding Nemo ). The film won the Academy Award for Best Animated Feature (as had &quot; Nemo &quot; ). Newman received two Oscar nominations: one for Best Original Score, and another for Best Original Song for &quot; Down to Earth &quot;, which he co-wrote with Peter Gabriel. He was nominated in the Original Score category with two other veteran composers, James Newton-Howard and Danny Elfman, both of whom have also been nominated for several Oscars but each time unsuccessfully. Newman lost both the score and song nominations to A R Rahman for his work on Slumdog Millionaire. He and Peter Gabriel did however win a Grammy for &quot; Down to Earth &quot;. In 2008 Newman scored Towelhead and Sam Mendes&apos; Revolutionary Road and in 2009 he scored Brothers. Newman&apos;s scores of 2011 include The Help, The Debt, and The Adjustment Bureau. Newman is to score the 23rd James Bond movie Skyfall, directed by his long time collaborator Sam Mendes, which celebrates the film franchise&apos;s 50th anniversary. [ Thomas Newman to compose Skyfall score http://www.mi6-hq.com/news/index.php?itemid%3D9922 MI6-HQ.com 04-01-12 ] [ Film compositions ] Year Title Director Notes 1984 Reckless James Foley Revenge of the Nerds Jeff Kanew Grandview, U.S.A. Randal Kleiser 1985 Desperately Seeking Susan Susan Seidelman Soundtrack released by Varèse Sarabande. Album shared with Making Mr. Right Girls Just Want to Have Fun Alan Metter The Man With One Red Shoe Stan Dragoti Real Genius Martha Coolidge Amazing Stories Various Episode Santa &apos;85. Soundtrack released by Intrada 1986 Gung Ho Ron Howard Jumpin&apos; Jack Flash Penny Marshall Song album with two Newman tracks 1987 Light of Day Paul Schrader Song album with one Newman track The Lost Boys Joel Schumacher Song album with one Newman track Less Than Zero Marek Kanievska Song album; no Newman score 1988 The Prince of Pennsylvania Ron Nyswaner The Great Outdoors Howard Deutch Song album with one Newman track 1989 Cookie Susan Seidelman 1990 Men Don&apos;t Leave Paul Brickman Heat Wave TV Kevin Hooks Naked Tango Leonard Schrader &apos;&apos; Welcome Home, Roxy Carmichael Jim Abrahams Soundtrack released by Varèse Sarabande 1991 Career Opportunities Bryan Gordon Song album with three Newman tracks released by Curb Deceived Damian Harris &apos;&apos; The Rapture Michael Tolkin Song album with ten Newman tracks The Linguini Incident Richard Shepard Soundtrack released by Varèse Sarabande Fried Green Tomatoes Jon Avnet Song album with three Newman tracks and separate score album, both released by MCA 1992 Those Secrets TV David Manson Soundtrack released by Masters Film Music The Player Robert Altman Soundtrack released by Varèse Sarabande Whispers in the Dark Christopher Crowe Varèse Sarabande album release cancelled Citizen Cohn TV Frank Pierson Scent of a Woman Martin Brest Soundtrack released by MCA 1993 Flesh and Bone Steve Kloves Soundtrack released by Varèse Sarabande Josh and S.A.M. Billy Weber Soundtrack released by Varèse Sarabande 1994 Threesome Andrew Fleming Soundtrack released by Varèse Sarabande. Twinned with American Buffalo The Favor Donald Petrie The Shawshank Redemption Frank Darabont Soundtrack released by Sony BMG The War Jon Avnet Song album with 12 Newman tracks released by MCA Corrina, Corrina Jessie Nelson Song album with one Newman track Little Women Gillian Armstrong Soundtrack released by Sony Classical 1995 Unstrung Heroes Diane Keaton Soundtrack released by Hollywood Records How to Make an American Quilt Jocelyn Moorhouse Soundtrack released by MCA 1996 Up Close &amp; Personal Jon Avnet Soundtrack released by Hollywood Records Phenomenon Jon Turteltaub Song album with one Newman track released by Reprise American Buffalo Michael Corrente Soundtrack released by Varèse Sarabande. Twinned with Threesome The People vs. Larry Flynt Miloš Forman Soundtrack released by Angel Records 1997 Mad City Costa Gavras Soundtrack released by Varèse Sarabande Red Corner Jon Avnet Soundtrack released by EAR Oscar and Lucinda Gillian Armstrong Soundtrack released by Sony Classical 1998 The Horse Whisperer Robert Redford Soundtrack released by Hollywood Records Meet Joe Black Martin Brest Soundtrack released by Universal Records 1999 American Beauty Sam Mendes Soundtrack released by DreamWorks The Green Mile Frank Darabont Soundtrack released by Warner Bros. 2000 Erin Brockovich Steven Soderbergh Soundtrack released by Sony Classical Pay It Forward Mimi Leder Soundtrack released by Varèse Sarabande 2001 In the Bedroom Todd Field Soundtrack released by Varèse Sarabande 2002 The Salton Sea D. J. Caruso Soundtrack released by Varèse Sarabande Road to Perdition Sam Mendes Soundtrack released by Decca Records White Oleander Peter Kosminsky Soundtrack released by Varèse Sarabande 2003 Finding Nemo Andrew Stanton Soundtrack released by Walt Disney Records Angels in America Mike Nichols Soundtrack released by Nonesuch 2004 Lemony Snicket&apos;s A Series of Unfortunate Events Brad Silberling Soundtrack released by Sony Classical 2005 Cinderella Man Ron Howard Soundtrack released by Decca Records Jarhead Sam Mendes Soundtrack released by Decca Records 2006 Little Children Todd Field Soundtrack released by Silva Screen Records The Good German Steven Soderbergh Soundtrack released by Varèse Sarabande 2007 Towelhead Alan Ball Soundtrack released by Lakeshore Records 2008 WALL-E Andrew Stanton Soundtrack released by Walt Disney Records Revolutionary Road Sam Mendes Soundtrack released by Nonesuch 2009 Brothers Jim Sheridan Soundtrack released by Relativity Music Group 2011 The Debt John Madden Soundtrack released by Relativity Music Group, Silva Screen Music The Adjustment Bureau George Nolfi Soundtrack released by Relativity Music Group The Help Tate Taylor Score album released by Varèse Sarabande The Iron Lady Phyllida Lloyd Soundtrack released by Sony Classical 2012 The Best Exotic Marigold Hotel John Madden Soundtrack released by Sony Classical The Newsroom Various Main Theme and Pilot Skyfall Sam Mendes 2013 The Bitter Pill Steven Soderbergh [ Additional soundtracks ] 2005: Madagascar (from American Beauty ) 2007: Sicko (from Little Children, Lemony Snicket&apos;s A Series of Unfortunate Events and In the Bedroom ) 2010: Alice in Wonderland (Teaser Trailer) (from Lemony Snicket&apos;s A Series of Unfortunate Events ) Newman has composed music for television as well, including theme music for the series Boston Public and the miniseries Angels in America. His theme music for the television show Six Feet Under won two Grammy Award s in 2003, for Best Instrumental Composition as well as Best Instrumental Arrangement. Newman also wrote a commissioned concert work for orchestra, Reach Forth Our Hands, for the 1996 Cleveland Bicentennial. The Los Angeles Philharmonic has commissioned a new work by Newman to be performed by the Kronos Quartet and Los Angeles Philharmonic, conducted by Leonard Slatkin, during the orchestra&apos;s 2009-2010 season. Newman is also responsible for the Coles Supermarket Jingle in the 2010 line of advertisements. [ October 2010 ] [ Awards &amp; amp; nominations ] Newman has received a total of ten Academy Award nominations, however as of 2012 he has yet to win the award, making him the most nominated living composer to have never won an Oscar, and behind Alex North, who received 14 unsuccessful nominations. Nine of his nominations are in the Best Original Score category, while one is for Best Original Song. His first major success&apos;s for which he was recognised, came in 1994, when he earned two Academy Award nominations for his scores to Little Women and The Shawshank Redemption; he was the only double-nominee that year, although he lost to Hans Zimmer for The Lion King. He received his third Academy Award nomination in 1996 for the score to Diane Keaton &apos;s comedy Unstrung Heroes, but again lost, this time to Alan Menken for Pocahontas. He has also received one Golden Globe nomination for 1999&apos;s American Beauty, but did not win, as well as six Grammy nominations and two wins. Award Year Category Project Outcome Academy Award 1995 Best Music, Original Score Little Women Nominated Best Music, Original Score The Shawshank Redemption Nominated 1996 Best Music, Original Musical or Comedy Score Unstrung Heroes &apos; Nominated 2000 Best Music, Original Score American Beauty Nominated 2003 Best Music, Original Score Road to Perdition Nominated 2004 Best Music, Original Score Finding Nemo Nominated 2005 Best Achievement in Music Written for Motion Pictures, Original Score Lemony Snicket&apos;s A Series of Unfortunate Events Nominated 2007 Best Achievement in Music Written for Motion Pictures, Original Score The Good German Nominated 2009 Best Achievement in Music Written for Motion Pictures, Original Score WALL-E Nominated Best Achievement in Music Written for Motion Pictures, Original Song (with Peter Gabriel ) for &quot; Down to Earth &quot; Nominated Annie Award 2004 Outstanding Music in an Animated Feature Production Finding Nemo Won BAFTA Award 2000 Anthony Asquith Award for Film Music American Beauty Won 2009 Best Music WALL-E Nominated Classical Brit Award 2010 Soundtrack of the Year Revolutionary Road Won Emmy Award 1991 Outstanding Achievement in Main Title Theme Music Against the Law Nominated 2002 Outstanding Main Title Theme Music Six Feet Under Won Golden Globe Award 2000 Best Original Score - Motion Picture American Beauty Nominated 2009 Best Original Song - Motion Picture (with Peter Gabriel ) for &quot; Down to Earth &quot; WALL-E Nominated 2012 Best Original Song - Motion Picture (with Mary J. Blige, Harvey Mason, Jr. and Damon Thomas ) for &quot; The Living Proof &quot; The Help Nominated Grammy Award 1995 Best Instrumental Composition Written for a Motion Picture or for Television The Shawshank Redemption Nominated 1997 Best Instrumental Composition Written for a Motion Picture or for Television Unstrung Heroes Nominated 2001 Best Score Soundtrack Album for a Motion Picture, Television or other Visual Media American Beauty Won 2003 Best Instrumental Composition for Title Theme Six Feet Under Won Best Instrumental Arrangement for Title Theme Six Feet Under Won 2005 Best Score Soundtrack Album for a Motion Picture, Television or Other Visual Media Angels in America Nominated 2009 Best Score Soundtrack Album for Motion Picture, Television or Other Visual Media WALL-E Nominated Best Song Written for Motion Picture, Television or Other Visual Media (with Peter Gabriel ) for &quot; Down to Earth &quot; Won Best Instrumental Arrangement (with Peter Gabriel ) for Score Track, &quot; Define Dancing &quot; Won World Soundtrack Awards 2003 Best Original Soundtrack of the Year Road to Perdition Nominated 2005 Soundtrack Composer of the Year Lemony Snicket&apos;s A Series of Unfortunate Events Nominated 2008 Best Original Song Written Directly for Film (with Peter Gabriel ) for &quot; Down to Earth &quot; WALL-E Won Best Original Score of the Year Nominated [ American Film Institute ] Newman&apos;s scores for American Beauty and The Shawshank Redemption were nominated for AFI&apos;s 100 Years of Film Scores. [ References ] [ External links ] [ 2353 ] Thomas Newman Complete Thomas Newman at Filmreference.com Thomas Newman at Soundtrackguide.net [ Newman, Thomas October 20, 1955 ] Category:1955 births Category:American composers Category:American film score composers Category:BAFTA winners (people) Category:Emmy Award winners Category:Grammy Award winners Category:Living people Category:People from Los Angeles, California ar:توماس نيومان ca:Thomas Newman de:Thomas Newman et:Thomas Newman es:Thomas Newman fr:Thomas Newman it:Thomas Newman he:תומאס ניומן nl:Thomas Newman ja:トーマス・ニューマン nn:Thomas Newman nds:Thomas Newman pl:Thomas Newman pt:Thomas Newman ro:Thomas Newman ru:Ньюман, Томас fi:Thomas Newman sv:Thomas Newman uk:Томас Ньюман