[ February 2008 ] [ blue ] [ white ] [ red ] { Viking s } { the Epic } { http://www.lhs.fuhsd.org/ } There is also a Lynbrook High School in Lynbrook, New York. Lynbrook High School (also referred to as Lynbrook or LHS) is a co-educational, public, four-year secondary school located in the West San Jose neighborhood of San Jose, California, USA. It was founded in 1965 and graduated its first class in 1968. Lynbrook belongs to the Fremont Union High School District along with Monta Vista High School, Cupertino High School, Fremont High School, and Homestead High School. It is accredited by the Western Association of Schools and Colleges. It was once ranked among the top five public comprehensive secondary schools in California. Lynbrook is known as one of the top high schools in the Bay Area. A larger percentage of its graduates are accepted into the University of California (UC) system, more than any other school in the Fremont Union High School District. Lynbrook won its Homecoming football game against Harker School on Friday October 28, 2011 after a 19-year losing streak. [ History ] Lynbrook High School opened on September 13, 1965, with an enrollment of 1,026 students. Because Cupertino High School had grown very large by that time, a new school in the West San Jose area was constructed. The District Board nominated Kendall Stanger as the first principal of the school. The school was technologically advanced around the time it was built and had closed-circuit television and air conditioning. During the first year, there was no gymnasium, locker room, or swimming pool. There were sophomores and freshman attending that year. By the second school year the gymnasium, locker room, and &apos;Olympic sized&apos; swimming pool were complete. [ Campus ] Lynbrook library Many of Lynbrook&apos;s buildings and facilities are in their original state and have not been significantly renovated. However, the bleachers in the main Gym were replaced between the years 2003 and 2006. Most of Lynbrook&apos;s buildings are constructed of old brick exteriors. New structures and facilities built since 1990 include the library, swimming pool, field house, and Voyager buildings. During the summer in 2009, the parking lot was renovated and solar panels were added. Lynbrook has a football field with a dirt track around it, a swimming pool, and a small baseball field. Although the baseball field is in need of renovations, Lynbrook&apos;s Olympic-sized swimming pool is in excellent condition. During water polo season, Lynbrook&apos;s nine lane swimming pool devotes about half of its area to non-lane-divided deep-water areas. The deep-water area is used mainly for water polo competitions. The pool was renovated in the summer of 2009. The softball and field hockey areas were also renovated in 2006-2007. Also, on September 12, 2011, construction for a new rubber track, football field, and new baseball field began. The classroom wings are on the back (east) side of the school and are numbered from 101-615. The 100 and 200 wings are on the north side, and the 500 and 600 wings are on the south side. The gym nasium, swimming pool, and tennis and basketball courts are situated on the southwest side of Lynbrook&apos;s campus. The western third of the campus consists of the Stober field (a large green lawn used primarily for field hockey practice and student events) and a football field. The visual and performing arts center is the school&apos;s easternmost building. The school&apos;s mural of the Viking, which faces the main parking lot, is painted on the building that houses the girls&apos; locker rooms and the weight training room. The rally court or quad is the hub of student life at Lynbrook and is surrounded by the cafeteria, classroom wings, auditorium, and the Associated Student Body den. School-wide homecoming skits are performed in the rally court. Other student activities also take place in the quad, including &quot; Club Day. &quot; On Club Day, participating clubs set up tables in the quad and fundraise by selling food and drinks. Spirit Weeks, week-long events put on by the Associated Student Body (ASB), are also held in the quad. Spirit weeks culminate in a school-wide rally at the end of the week, located in the main gym. While the bleachers in the main gym were being replaced, rallies were held outdoors in the quad. [ Academics ] Lynbrook has a solid academic reputation. Lynbrook has widely been known for consistently being one of the top 20 high schools in California for several years. Lynbrook&apos;s academic reputation has also influenced the real estate market in the surrounding neighborhood, causing home prices to rise higher than other neighborhoods in the San Jose area. As of 2011, Lynbrook High School&apos;s base Academic Performance Index (API) is 943, which is 201 points higher than the state average for high schools, and is similar to those of Saratoga, Mission San Jose, and Monta Vista. The API ranking for Lynbrook High School is 19 out of 19, which is the best rating possible for any school, and its similar-schools API ranking is 9 out of 10. In 2008, Lynbrook was ranked 6th out of all public schools in the state of California, excluding magnet schools, based on API scores. In 2009, the U.S. News &amp; World Report ranked Lynbrook as the 98th best high school in the United States. In 2007, the school scored a 10 out of 10 in both API Statewide and Similar School ranking. [ http://www.greatschools.net/modperl/achievement/ca/5499#from..Tab Lynbrook High School Test Scores - San Jose, California - CA Greatschools.net 2010-09-07 2011-08-26 ] Lynbrook students consistently receive high marks on standardized exam s, including the SAT and Advanced Placement Exams. On the SAT I (now known as the SAT Reasoning Test), the mean critical reading score for the class of 2011 was 624/800, the mean writing score was 647/800, and the mean mathematics score was 693/800. The mean composite score on the SAT was a 1964/2400. Out of 1585 tests taken by 672 students who took Advanced Placement Exams in 2010, 53% scored a 5, the highest score possible, and 92% of the people passed. STAR test results are also remarkably high, with most students scoring proficient or above in almost all subjects, particularly in mathematics and science.In 2009, Lynbrook produced 58 national merit semifinalists, and 78 commended students, which is the highest proportion based on the size of the graduating class (487) out of all of the high schools in the Fremont Union High School District. Also, 119 students were awarded with the title of AP Scholar, 65 became AP Scholars with Honors, 6 became AP Scholars with Distinction, and 9 students became National AP Scholars. Almost all students take the SAT. Many SAT prep schools have sprung up all over San Jose, Cupertino, and Saratoga. These SAT prep classes are taken by a large percentage of Lynbrook pupils. Most students choose to take numerous honors and AP classes to boost their GPA. Lynbrook has a relatively high proportion of high student GPA&apos;s. Unweighted GPA &apos;s above 3.8 are pretty common. For most students, heavy emphasis is placed on honors and Advanced Placement (AP) courses. AP United States History (APUSH) is considered one of the hardest courses, with typically two chapters of at least three hours (for each chapter) of reading and notes-taking per night. Due to their high academic success, many Lynbrook graduates have gone to several high profile colleges and universities around the country, including Ivy League institutions. Although students sometimes complain that there is too much stress, myriad graduates report having a much easier time in college compared to other non-Lynbrook classmates, as Lynbrook is similar in difficulty, stress levels, and the ways college classes are taught. More than half of all Lynbrook graduates attend the University of California, making Lynbrook one of the university&apos;s largest feeders. Not all students attend four-year colleges; about one-fourth attend two-year colleges such as nearby distinguished De Anza College. In 2009-2010, Lynbrook boasted a total of 6 semifinalists, 2 finalists, and one 2nd place student from the Intel Science Talent Search, one of the most prestigious science competitions in America. In 2011, Lynbrook was recognized at a Gala Dinner in Washington DC as an Intel School of Distinction Winner in science. Lynbrook is one of only six schools (two elementary, two middle and two high schools, each for either math or science) in the nation to receive this recognition. [ Alternative Educational Routes ] During students&apos; junior and senior years, they can choose to participate in one of the alternative programs offered through De Anza College. The Middle College Program is available to juniors and seniors, while College Now is offered exclusively to members of the senior class. These programs allow students to explore interests with classes that aren&apos;t always offered at high school and build up college credits while completing the requirements for a diploma. [ August 2011 ] [ Athletics and extracurriculars ] [ Sports ] Lynbrook offers a total of 16 distinct sports, with sports split into two different seasons for girls and boys (such as tennis and volleyball) counted as one sport. { Lynbrook High School, San Jose, CA } [ 3 ] Fall Cross Country (girls and boys) Field Hockey (girls) Football (boys) Tennis (girls) Volleyball (girls) Water Polo (girls and boys) Winter Basketball (girls and boys) Soccer (girls and boys) Wrestling (girls and boys) Spring Swimming (girls and boys) Badminton (girls and boys) Tennis (boys) Volleyball (boys) Baseball (boys) Softball (girls) Golf (girls and boys) Track and Field (girls and boys) Year Round: Cheer Dance [ Other Extracurricular Activities ] [ 3 ] Music/Performance International Thespian Society Choir Marching Band and Color Guard (fall) Orchestra and Wind Ensemble Winter Guard (winter/spring) Winter Percussion (winter/spring) Cheerleading Dance squad (the Valkyries) Business/Law FBLA (Future Business Leaders of America) JSA (Junior State of America) DECA Honor/Service societies NHS (National Honor Society) CSF (California Scholarship Federation) Interact Club NCHS SHS JNHS Debate/Policy Speech and Debate Mock Trial Model United Nations Academic Robotics Team (Team 846: Funky Monkeys) Math Honor Society Science Bowl Team Junior Engineering Technical Society Lynbrook Neuroscience Science Club School publications Newspaper (The Epic) Literary Magazine (Vertigo) Yearbook (The Valhalla; the 2004-2005 edition being the first in color) Newsletter (The Lynk; formerly &quot; Viking Pride &quot; ) Student Outreach Publication (Aletheia, first archive published in 2010) Lynbrook has more than 70 clubs, a complete list of which is available here. [ ASB ] The Lynbrook ASB (Associated Student Body) organizes student activities and is led by both student and administrative members. A complete updated list of ASB officers can be found here. The ASB organizes many class competitions, brunch and lunch time entertainment, rallies, and also homecoming. Homecoming is the largest event on the school calendar. During homecoming, classes hold &quot; skits &quot; and compete against each other during homecoming week. ASB cards, issued by the ASB, allow students to receive discounted prices on school merchandise, tickets, and activities. As of the 2011-2012 school year, an ASB card can be purchased for $75, with the cost of the yearbook included. Lynbrook holds school dances throughout the year, usually on Friday nights. The dances begin at 7:30 P.M. and end at 10:30 P.M. School rules are in effect during the dances, and only Lynbrook students are allowed in the dances unless a guest pass is obtained. There are 4 to 6 spirit weeks held throughout the school year. During these themed weeks, the ASB puts on spirit games in the quad that involve students and teachers in ridiculous but entertaining games. Usually these games involve one student from each class. More information about Lynbrook&apos;s ASB can be found at its website here. [ Demographics ] Like most other American high school s, Lynbrook is a four-year high school that consists of freshman, sophomore, junior, and senior classes. Total enrollment for the school year 2010-2011 was 1741, making it the second smallest high school in the Fremont Union High School District. Race Percentage (Class of 2011) Asian American 76% White American 18% Other 6% Percent Limited English 6% [ Ethnic diversity ] As of the 2011-2012 school year, Lynbrook High School had a total of 1,771 students. From the senior class of 2012, approximately 82% of the students are Asian, 13% are White, 5% are African American, Latino, Native American, etc., and 4% are English Learners. Like many top high schools in the Bay Area, Lynbrook&apos;s student body is primarily Chinese American (many of whom are Taiwanese) with a growing Indian American population. { http://www.schoolmatters.com/schools.aspx/q/page=sp/sid=84426 } [ August 2011 ] [ School boundaries ] Lynbrook High School&apos;s boundaries comprise the western part of West San Jose and parts of northern Saratoga. The school&apos;s area is bound to the north by Bollinger Road, to the east by Saratoga Creek, to the south by Cox Avenue, and to the west by De Anza Boulevard. Currently, the Residency Verification policy states that all students who are enrolled in Lynbrook High School must be physically residing within the district&apos;s boundaries. The Residency Verification Anonymous Hotline is one of the district&apos;s ways of helping to enforce the policy. (see Fremont Union High School District ). However, a small number of students live elsewhere but are allowed enrollment due to lottery enrollment or by exceptions from the district. [ School information ] [ Schedule ] Lynbrook High School&apos;s schedule has Mondays and Thursdays as tutorial schedules. Tuesdays are odd block (only odd-numbered periods are attended), and Wednesdays are even block (only even-numbered periods are attended). Fridays are normal schedules. There are a total of seven periods (from 1 to 7), and 1st and 7th periods are optional (most students take either six or seven periods, although some take as few as four). Lynbrook High School&apos;s classes usually start at 7:35 A.M. and end at 2:05 (if the student&apos;s last class is at period 6) or 2:55 P.M. (if the student has 7th period), although the times may vary slightly for the different days of the school week. On Tuesdays, classes begin at 7:35 A.M., but only odd-numbered periods are attended (periods 1, 3, 5, and 7). Students who do not have 7th period and who do not choose to eat at the school are dismissed at 12:45 P.M. On Wednesdays, classes begin at 9:15 A.M. and only 2nd, 4th, and 6th periods are attended, with a staff development and collaboration period before the start of the second period. Wednesday is the only day of the school week that is late start. The school also has 35-minute tutorial (i.e., study hall) periods on every Monday and Thursday. Brunches are 15-minute breaks, and lunches are 40-minute breaks followed by sixth and seventh periods. [ Policies and grading ] Lynbrook High School&apos;s most important policies are covered by the Fremont Union High School District &apos;s main policies, including the Zero Tolerance Policy, Academic Code of Conduct, and Residency Verification. They are all stated in the first few pages of the Student Planner. Assistant principals and the Student Legislative Council set minor policies and school rules. Lynbrook has a fairly serious academic honesty and internet policy, where many students have previously been expelled for cheating on a test, finding the answer keys to the exam, hacking into the network, etc. Like most other high schools within the Fremont Union High School District, most of Lynbrook&apos;s classes follow an A-F grading system; 90-100% is marked as A, 80-89.9% as B, 70-79.9% as C, 60-69.9% as D, and lower grades are marked as F. [ Course information ] [ AP and Honors courses ] Lynbrook offers a total of 17 different AP courses (counting AP Calculus AB and BC as two separate courses) and 8 different honors courses. [ 3 ] Laboratory science AP Biology AP Chemistry AP Physics C: Mechanics Chemistry Honors Physics Honors Mathematics AP Calculus AB AP Calculus BC AP Statistics Pre-Calculus Honors AP Computer Science AB English language AP English Language and Composition (11th grade) AP English Literature and Composition (12th grade) Foreign language AP Spanish (level 5) AP French (level 5) AP Japanese (not available school year 2007-2008, available in 2008-2009) (level 5) AP Chinese (level 5) Spanish 4 Honors French 4 Honors Japanese 4 Honors Chinese 4 Honors Social studies AP U.S. History (11th grade) AP U.S. Government and Politics (12th grade) Visual and performing arts AP Music Theory (not available as of school year 2008-2009) Advanced Drama Honors [ Graduation requirements ] A minimum of 220 semester units are required for graduation from Lynbrook High School. Ten units equal one year of work for each period. In order to graduate, students must also pass the CAHSEE, which can be taken during the 10th, 11th, and 12th grades. Subject Units English 40 Social studies 30 Science 20 Mathematics 20 Electives 70 Lynbrook&apos;s electives include 3D Design, Art, Architecture, Business, Choir, Computer-Aided Design (Drafting), Java, Computer Science, Electronics, French, Japanese, Marching Band, Wind Ensemble, Orchestra, and Spanish. Physical education is a required course for freshmen and sophomores. Sophomores also have the opportunity to take PE Athletics (Team Sports), Total Fitness, Racquet Sports, or Weight Training instead of PE 10. [ School technology ] Lynbrook considers itself a technology-literate school which uses the Internet as the primary means of communication. Like some schools within the Fremont Union High School District, teachers, administrators, and students use the School Loop for announcements, discussions, assignments and schedules. The School Loop can also be used for posting e-mail addresses and files. Teachers use turnitin.com, mygradebook.com, and other such websites to post grades and collect and evaluate papers. The school library also has 36 public terminals for student use. Two computer labs in Rooms 005 and 006 are only for use by classes that have made appointments with the school, but students may access the computers during Monday and Thursday tutorial periods. A flex lab also provides teachers a new technology-rich learning space. [ Notable Alumni ] Greg Camp (Class of 1985)-Former lead guitarist and songwriter for the band Smash Mouth Chris Cavanaugh (Class of 1980)-Former olympic swimmer, winning the gold medal in the 4×100m freestyle relay at the 1984 Summer Olympics Vinay Bhat (Class of 2001)- Grandmaster of chess [ Alma mater ] Under the mountains stately and strong True to our colors we shall raise our song Long may our friendships mount to the sky Long may we ever sing our praise to Lynbrook High! [ References ] [ External links ] Lynbrook High School Official Website Lynbrook ASB Lynbrook High&apos;s Official School Newspaper Yahoo! Education profile of Lynbrook Fremont Union High School District (FUHSD) Lynbrook Aletheia [ 37.300 -122.005 region:US_type:edu title ] Category:Educational institutions established in 1965 Category:Fremont Union High School District Category:High schools in San Jose, California Category:Public high schools in California