[ 42 49 9.072 N 102 59 53.2464 W region:US_type:edu ] [ 281 acre ha ] { Cardinal and White } { Eagle s } { http://www.csc.edu/ } [ Nebraska 42 49 9 N 102 59 53.25 W ] Chadron State College is a four-year public college in the Nebraska State College System in Chadron, Nebraska, United States. The college is located in the northern part of the Nebraska Panhandle, in the Pine Ridge area. The school opened in June 1911, although a previous institution dated from the late 19th century. The college has an enrollment of about 3,000 students. Five of its 25 major buildings are listed in the National Register of Historic Places. [ History ] Chadron State College was founded in 1909 by the Nebraska Legislature to provide a higher education institution in northwest Nebraska. The Board of Education of State Normal Schools selected Chadron as the location of its fourth institution in January, 1910. The school opened in June, 1911. Chadron State College is the only four-year and graduate-degree granting college in western Nebraska, and is accredited by the Higher Learning Commission of the North Central Association of Colleges and Schools and subject-oriented accrediting agencies. [ Presidents ] Richard R. Rhine (interim) Janie C. Park (2005–2012) Thomas L. Krepel (1998–2005) Samuel H. Rankin (1986–1998) Edwin C. Nelson (1975–1986) Larry G. Tangeman (1973–1975) Edwin C. Nelson (1967–1973) F. Clark Elkins (1961–1967) Barton L. Kline (1954–1961) Wiley G. Brooks (1941–1954) E.L. Rouse (acting) (1939–1941) Robert I. Elliott (1916–1940) Joseph Sparks (1911–1916) [ 2006 Spotted Tail wildfire ] In late July 2006, the college was in danger of damage from a wildfire. The Spotted Tail fire was caused by a lightning strike July 26 about seven miles (11  km) south of Chadron. By July 28, the wildfire, fueled by dry grass and winds, reached the edge of Chadron and the college campus. Fire crews prevented the wildfire from reach ing the campus. The pine ridge escarpment south of the college, including C-Hill, was blackened as a result of the fire. [ Location ] Chadron State College is located in northwest Nebraska in the Pine Ridge area, where opportunities for outdoor recreational activities such as fishing, hunting and cross-country skiing abound. Outside Magazine selected Dawes County, where Chadron is located, as one of the nation&apos;s top 100 counties in which to live. In early 2000, Sports Afield magazine rated Chadron among the “top 50 outdoor-sports towns” in the nationand also chose Chadron as one of the four best mountain-biking towns in the United States.Many trails have been constructed in recent years, to accommodate the growing interest. Chadron is a community of about 6,000 people. [ Facilities ] Adelaide Miller Hall The [ 281 acre ha on ] campus has 25 major buildings, five of which are listed in the National Register of Historic Places. Their replacement value is more than $60 million and they provide more than 1 million square feet (92,900 square meters) of floor space. Classrooms and laboratory and research facilities are available in seven classroom buildings and the library. The library contains the equivalent of more than 250,000 volumes. Its automated catalogue is part of the Nebraska State College network. During the past 15 years, the college has built several new facilities, including the Edwin and Avis Nelson Physical Activity Center, a wood-fired heating plant, the Student Center, and the Lindeken-Carillon Clock Tower. Three buildings have been renovated since 1998, including Joseph Sparks Hall, which houses administrative and alumni offices, and Edna Work Hall, a dormitory. Students can live in five residence halls or a family apartment complex. [ Buildings ] Dormitories Albert Kent Hall Edna Work Hall Edna Work Wing High Rise Lyle Andrews Hall West Court (family housing) Wiley Brooks Hall Other campus buildings, areas and offices Adelaide Miller Hall (psychology department and computer services) Administration Building (education, English, justice studies, social and communication arts departments) Barton Kline Campus Center (demolished 2011; formerly housed student union, cafeteria, bookstore, alumni, foundation, student tutoring services, college media relations) Burkhiser Technology Complex (business, industrial arts, family and consumer sciences departments) Vernon and Madge Fortune Chicoine Atrium (part of Sandoz Center) Con Marshall Pressbox (in Beebe Stadium) Crites Hall (admissions; business office; registrar; student services) Don Beebe Stadium Edwin and Avis Nelson Physical Activity Center (health, physical education and recreation department) Eugene Sheaman Heating Plant Glenn Hildreth Hall Joseph Sparks Hall (administration; alumni; Chadron State Foundation) Lindeken-Carillon Clock Tower Mari Sandoz High Plains Heritage Center Math and Science Building (mathematics, science departments) Memorial Hall (fine arts, music, theatre departments) Reta King Library Robert Elliott Field (in Beebe Stadium) Ross Armstrong Gymnasium (athletics) Student Center [ Academics ] Chadron State College offers more than 50 majors leading to bachelor’s degrees and professional studies options. Pre-professional programs in the health sciences are available, including the Rural Health Opportunities Program conducted jointly with the University of Nebraska Medical Center. Joseph Sparks Hall Training is offered in several academic and pre-professional programs. The academic areas are divided into the School of Arts and Sciences; the School of Business, Economics, Applied and Mathematical Sciences; and the School of Education, Human Performance, Counseling, Psychology and Social Work. The college offers four-year degrees as well as graduate programs leading to master&apos;s degrees. Pre-professional training is offered for careers such as medicine, law and engineering. The college recently closed its Honors program and Spanish program, leaving it without any foreign language offerings. Through its distance and alternative learning programs, the college provides off-campus and online services throughout western Nebraska. About 50 courses are available each semester in Scottsbluff at Western Nebraska Community College or the Panhandle Education Center. Courses also are offered at Alliance, North Platte and Sidney. Chadron State College offers courses and workshops each summer. The college has online classes available throughout the year. GetEducated.com named Chadron State College a Best Buy for affordability and quality in the Online MBA (regionally accredited) category in fall 2007. [ http://www.geteducated.com/online-college-ratings-and-rankings/best-buy-lists/best-buy-mba-regional Top Ranked Best Buys in Online MBAs - Regionally Accredited 2/5/2010 GetEducated.com ] [ Activities ] There are more than 70 student clubs and organizations on campus. Athletes have earned 97 All-American and 38 Academic All-American/Scholar-Athlete honors since 1980. In addition, the college has an Army ROTC program and a rodeo team. The college helps support the Post Playhouse at nearby Fort Robinson each summer. The Galaxy Series and Distinguished Speaker Series have brought noted entertainers and speakers to the college, including 2005 U.S. Poet Laureate Ted Kooser. The APVMA Pre-Vet Symposium was held at Chadron State College in March of 2004. It was the first time a school without a College of Veterinarian Medicine had hosted the symposium. [ Athletics ] Chadron State College&apos;s athletic teams are known as the Eagles. Don Beebe played in the National Football League with three teams, the Buffalo Bills, the Carolina Panthers and the Green Bay Packers. Beebe was the first player in NFL history to play in six Super Bowls. Danny Woodhead is a two-time winner of the Harlon Hill Trophy for best player in NCAA Division II football (2006 and 2007). Woodhead became the all-time leading rusher in NCAA football Oct. 6, 2007. CSC retired Woodhead&apos;s No. 3 jersey Dec. 15, 2007, the first time a jersey was retired in the college&apos;s history. Woodhead plays for the New England Patriots of the National Football League. Brett Hunter won the Division II National Championship in wrestling in the 2006–2007 season and again in the 2008–2009 season. Hunter was the first National Champion from CSC in 35 years, and the second in school history. He is the only CSC wrestler to win two titles. Josh Majerus won the Division II National Championship in the 2007–2008 season. He is the third champion in CSC history. In November 2007 the Eagles defeated Abilene Christian University 76-73 in a triple overtime game in the second round of the NCAA D-II football playoffs, with both teams breaking the record for most points ever scored in an NCAA division II playoff game. Chadron State had rallied from a 49-20 deficit at the end of the third quarter. Both teams accumulated [ 1369 yd m ] and 21 touchdowns. { Sportsillustrated.cnn.com } [ Notable alumni ] [ http://6thfloor.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/03/24/a-better-way-to-measure-twitter-influence/ A Better Way to Measure Twitter Influence 2011-03-24 2011-03-25 Leonhardt, David The New York Times ] Jim Anderson, Republican member of the Wyoming Senate (2001-incumbent); former member of the Wyoming House of Representatives (1997–2000). Legislature biography Senate biography Don Beebe – former NFL wide receiver Danny Woodhead – NFL running back New England Patriots, all-time NCAA football leading rusher (all divisions) William David Sanders – Teacher, killed in Columbine High School massacre Larry Riley – NBA Franchise Golden State Warriors General Manager &amp; Coach. Former NCAA Basketball &amp; Baseball coach. Togiola Tulafono – Current governor of American Samoa Jerry D. Mahlman – American meteorologist and global warming expert Val Logsdon Fitch – Nobel Prize-winning American nuclear physicist (attended for three years before being drafted into the U.S. army in 1943) Steve McClain – head basketball coach for the University of Wyoming from 1998–2007 Tim Walz – U.S. House of Representatives, Minnesota 1st District. Rafinha Bastos – Found by New York Times analysis to be the &quot; most influential &quot; profile on Twitter. Attended Chadron in 1999. [ References ] [ External links ] Chadron State College Web site &apos;&apos;The Eagle&apos;&apos;, student newspaper Category:American Association of State Colleges and Universities Category:Buildings and structures in Dawes County, Nebraska Category:Chadron, Nebraska Category:Education in Dawes County, Nebraska Category:Educational institutions established in 1911 Category:Nebraska State College System Category:North Central Association of Colleges and Schools Category:Universities and colleges in Nebraska no:Chadron State College