[ April 2012 ] [ Garden Warbler Sylvia borin (Örebro County).jpg 250px LC iucn3.1 Animal ia Chordata Aves Passeriformes Sylviidae Sylvia S. borin Sylvia borin ( Boddaert, 1783, France) ] The Garden Warbler, Sylvia borin, is a common and widespread typical warbler which breeds throughout northern and temperate Europe into western Asia. This small passerine bird is strongly migratory, and winters in central and southern Africa. It is fairly common and widespread in England and Wales; in Ireland it is largely confined to the midlands where it breeds on the shores of small lakes. This is a nondescript bird, 13–14.5  cm long, mainly brown-grey above and whitish below. It has no obvious distinctive features. Like most &quot; warblers &quot;, it is insectivorous. It is a species of shady woodlands with ground cover for nesting. The nest is built in low shrub or brambles, and 3–7 egg s are laid. The Garden Warbler&apos;s [ Sylvia borin.ogg song ] is a pleasant chattering with many clearer notes like a Blackbird. The song can be confused with that of Blackcap, but is more melodious and lacks the warbling end-phrase found in Blackcap songs. Indeed, despite their dissimilar colour pattern, these two species are probably more closely related to each other than to any other typical warbler (The Sylvia Monograph, A &amp; C Black, London; Jønsson &amp; Fjeldså 2006). The composer Olivier Messiaen, who admired birdsong, used the song of S. borin as basis for his 1971 work La fauvette des jardins, the title being the French name of the species.The beccafico, or fig-eater, a much prized delicacy in Italy, is not as sometimes thought the Garden Warbler but the closely related Orphean Warbler. [ References ] [ BirdLife International 2004 52836 Sylvia melanothorax 12 May 2006 ] Database entry includes justification for why this species is of least concern The Sylvia Warblers Monograph, A &amp; C Black, London: ‘Sylvia Warblers: Identification, Taxonomy and Phylogeny of the Genus Sylvia’ (2001) by Shirihai, H., Gargallo, G., &amp; Helbig, J. A. [Illustrated by Alan Harris; Photographic Editing and Field Photography by David Cottridge; Edited by Guy M. Kirwan and Lars Svensson.]. (Helm Identification Guides) [ 10.1111/j.1463-6409.2006.00221.x ] Jønsson, Knud A. &amp; Fjeldså, Jon (2006): A phylogenetic supertree of oscine passerine birds (Aves: Passeri). Zool. Scripta 35(2): 149–186. (HTML abstract) [ External links ] Garden Warbler videos and photos on the Internet Bird Collection Ageing and sexing (PDF) by Javier Blasco-Zumeta Avibase [ Sylvia borin ] Category:Sylviidae Category:Birds of Europe Category:Birds of Turkey Category:Birds of Asia Category:Birds of Pakistan Category:Birds of Africa Category:Birds of Palestine Category:Birds of Western Sahara kbd:Вэдгъуабжэ ba:Һаҙ килейеге bg:Градинско коприварче br:Devedig-liorzh ca:Tallarol gros cs:Pěnice slavíková cy:Telor yr Ardd da:Havesanger de:Gartengrasmücke et:Aed-põõsalind es:Sylvia borin eo:Ĝardensilvio eu:Baso-txinbo fa:آلوچه‌خورک fo:Garðljómari fr:Fauvette des jardins io:Bekafiko it:Sylvia borin he:סבכי אפור lt:Sodinė devynbalsė li:Zengersj van de Ouwe Waereld hu:Kerti poszáta nl:Tuinfluiter nap:Fucetula no:Hagesanger nn:Hagesongar pms:Sylvia borin pl:Gajówka (ptak) pt:Felosa-das-figueiras ru:Садовая славка sl:Vrtna penica fi:Lehtokerttu sv:Trädgårdssångare tr:Boz ötleğen