[ August 2010 ] [ Leicester North ] { Edward Watkin } { Manchester, Sheffield and Lincolnshire Railway } [ ussg ] [ ussg ] { Great Central Railway Plc } { 6 (in operation), 3 others } [ 8.25 mi km ] { (Leicester) } [ 10 mi km ] { (Nottingham) } { 1897 } { 17 March 1969 } { 1970 } { Reopened } { 1976 } { GCR Plc formed } { 2000 } { Double track opened } The Great Central Railway (GCR) is a heritage railway in Leicestershire. The GCR is currently Britain&apos;s only double track mainline heritage railway, with [ 5.25 mi km ] of working double track, period signalling, locomotives and rolling stock and, with the completion of the Mountsorrel Railway Project, will be the only double track heritage line in Britain with an industrial branchline spur. It runs for [ 7.75 mi km ] in total from the large market town of Loughborough to a new terminus just north of Leicester. Four stations are in daily operation, each restored to a period in the railway&apos;s commercial history, the 1950s ( [ Loughborough Central ] ), World War II and the remainder of the 1940s ( Quorn &amp; Woodhouse ), the Edwardian Era ( [ Rothley ] ) and the 1960s ( Leicester North ). [ Commercial history ] In 1897 the Great Central Railway itself was formed, becoming the last steam mainline in the United Kingdom. Two years later in 1899 &quot; The London Extension &quot; was officially opened to passenger and freight traffic, allowing more direct journeys from the capital to Nottingham, Leicester, Sheffield and Manchester. The entire line was built to accommodate a European standard loading gauge and all but a few stations were single island platform s. This construction scheme was devised by chairman Sir Edward Watkin, who had envisioning his railway one day running under a Channel Tunnel to France, linking Britain with the continent. This never came to fruition however as the Beeching report to begin cutback and closure was published in 1963, some 31 years before the tunnel was fully constructed. In the report, the line was listed as a duplicate of the Midland Main Line. Apart from the most Southern section into London, the line was closed as a through route in 1966 as part of the Beeching Axe, although a section of the line between Nottingham and Rugby remained open until 1969. The closure became one of Doctor Beeching &apos;s largest cutbacks. It was also famous for being one of the most controversial. [ Preservation ] In 1969 local groups who opposed the closure gathered together for a meeting in a Leicester Central waiting room. The Mainline Preservation Group (MLPG) was formed to restore a section of the railway to run Britain&apos;s largest steam and diesel locomotives on double track in a heritage capacity, and recreate scenes from the past using these features. Work began on salvaging as much reusable material from the recent demolitions and start work on the project. The original plan was to restore the entire closed line from [ Nottingham Arkwright Street ] to [ Rugby Central ], but this was soon cut back to a smaller Loughborough to Leicester section due to time and financial realities. British Rail retained a single track between the Loughborough and Ruddington for British Gypsum freight and access to the now-closed Ministry of Defence base. [ The early years (1969-1976) ] The MLPG received a lease on the station, buildings and most of the trackbed at [ Loughborough Central ] in 1970; this would become their base of operations. By the following year negotiations into purchasing the rest of the remaining railway had proven successful and the group were able to buy it for a mere £75,000 (£ { 0 } as of ), [ UK ]. The rest of the Loughborough yard complex was secured in 1972. In the same year, the first coaching stock arrived on site. The first open day occurred in 1973, shortly after the arrival of working motive power. Passengers were offered simple wagon or coach rides run by small industrial locomotives. On 30 September 1973 LMS Stanier Class 5 4-6-0 No. 5231 hauled the first passenger train since the railway&apos;s commercial closure to Quorn and back, but at the same time the Down line was being uplifted between Birstall and Quorn because of BR&apos;s increasing demands. To purchase what was left of the track the MLPG was re-merged into a supporting charity, the Main line Steam Trust (MLST). The entire value of the eight miles of Up line were re-assessed by BR and swelled up to £279,000 (£ { 0 } as of ), [ UK ] and the MLST was now paying £3,300 a month (£ { 0 } as of ), [ UK ] just to keep it. A deal was set on 1 April 1976 that would see the remainder of the Down line ripped up if BR&apos;s cash demand was not raised. At this time passenger trains were still running as far as Rothley, but without an ample supply of working mainline classes the line had to resort to industrial tank engines working single track, ironic considering the original vision made by the MLPG seven years previously. [ Great Central Railway Plc ] To purchase the land and track, Great Central Railway (1976) PLC issued shares, and the MLPG transformed into the MLST, a charitable body to support the company. Charnwood Borough Council agreed to purchase the land from BR and lease it to the railway for 99 years. However this still left GCR (1976) PLC the task of raising over £150,000 (£ { 0 } as of ), [ UK ] to purchase the track. Ultimately, the target was not met and only a single track between Loughborough and Quorn could be afforded (BR allowed more time to raise funds to purchase Quorn to Rothley). The double track from Rothley to Belgrave &amp; Birstall was lifted along with the &apos;down&apos; line from Loughborough to Rothley. In the late 1980s the intention was announced to extend the line back to Belgrave &amp; Birstall. The former station had been vandalised and the railway had no choice but to demolish the buildings. In 1990, a station called Leicester North was opened a hundred metres to the south of Belgrave &amp; Birstall. This shift in location placed the new station inside Leicester&apos;s city boundary, allowing the &apos;Leicester&apos; tag to be included in the name along with unlocking extra funds to assist in the construction. [ The double track project (1991-present day) ] With the exception of the short section between Bewdley North and Bewdley South signal boxes on the Severn Valley Railway, the GCR is currently the only standard gauge heritage railway in the UK with double track outside of stations. However, there are other preserved lines that were previously double track. In the 1990s, David Clarke approached the railway about the possibility of double tracking the line. As a signalling enthusiast, David dreamed of operating a signal box on a double track main line, and so the campaign to raise funds to double the section between Quorn and Rothley was launched, with David himself providing a large amount of the capital. Until signalling was complete the second track was operated separately from the main track. This provided a unique opportunity for trains to &apos;chase&apos; each other between Quorn and Swithland. After reaching Quorn, work moved ahead to extend the second track to Loughborough. The double track between Loughborough and Rothley opened on 1 June 2000. This gives additional capacity which is especially useful at galas, where up to six trains may be in operation at any one time. This enables the running of non-passenger carrying trains (freights, TPO set) during galas to a greater extent than any other heritage railway. It also means that the timetable can be generally adhered to, as delays do not cascade as they do on single track lines. Her Majesty&apos;s Rail Inspectorate has granted powers to run private test trains at up to 60  mph. Other special trains at public events run at up to [ 45 mph km/h 1 ]. Typically UK heritage railways are limited to a maximum speed of [ 25 mph km/h 1 ]. { http://www.rail-reg.gov.uk/server/show/nav.1354 } In 2004 a new signal box at Quorn opened, the only preserved box in the UK with a double track on either side. With this new signal box a train can, in theory, be dispatched from Loughborough every 10 minutes. A further signal box at Swithland Sidings is being fitted with Great Western Railway style signals. [ Major engineering projects ] There are currently four engineering projects underway. These include extensions south and north and also a half mile length of line joining together the Loughborough to Leicester line, and Loughborough to Ruddington line as the Leicester to Ruddington line. [ The gap and Loughborough Midland (High Level) ] [ Loughborough Gap ] Abutment for the missing bridge over Railway Terrace. This bridge needs to be replaced if the gap is to be bridged. Between the A60 and Loughborough locomotive shed is &quot; The Gap &quot;, a section of embankment and bridges (including a large single span over the Midland Main Line) that need to be reinstated to join the two concerns together. That is a long term, expensive project and in the mean time there are plans to construct a new &quot; Loughborough Midland High Level &quot; station on the embankment near the A60 road bridge. This would allow easy interchange with Midland Main Line trains with trains from the GCR(N) and if the Gap is bridged, the Greater Great Central Railway (GGCR) as it is known almost universally by Great Central staff. As of 12 February 2009 it was announced that the project would receive £350,000 for a feasibility study. Charnwood Borough Council has won the grant from the East Midlands Development Agency. The GCR is to contribute £100,000 to the study (combined cost of £450,000). When completed the GCRN will merge with the GCR to create a single 18-mile route which will also be rebuilt as a double track line for most, if not the whole length. [ The Mountsorrel Railway Project ] The Line and Wagons at Swithland Junction in November 2010 This is a project devised and financed by Railway Vehicle Preservations Limited. { Railway Vehicle Preservations } The projects aim is the rebuilding of the Mountsorrel branch off the Great Central railway at Swithland sidings to the working Mountsorrel quarry. The branch is essentially intact but the track was lifted in the mid 1960s. The original purpose of the reinstatement was to provide a carriage shed to house the restored carriages of Railway Vehicle Preservations Ltd and shelter them from the elements. In 2006 they applied for planning permission for the shed; this was rejected due to badger setts discovered on site. The reinstatement of the line is going ahead with ballast being donated from the quarry it served. The total length being reinstated is [ 1.25 mi km 0 ]. It is intended a halt will be built at the quarry end, offering train rides up the line to add an extra attraction to the Great Central Railway, with services either run by a DMU or else a push-pull fitted steam/diesel locomotive. The plans for the shed are being re-evaluated and the line is now fully ballasted awaiting track. [ Stations ] [ Loughborough Central ] Loughborough Central is the largest of the working stations on the line, with a long overhead canopy, museum, gift shop, café and 1950s period detail. This has helped the station feature in numerous movie s and TV show s. The signal box and traction maintenance depot north of the platform are both open for public viewing, allowing for an insight into the physical labour that is required to run a steam railway. The shed will be replaced in the near-future by a larger, more historically significant building on the site of an abandoned rubbish dump. Serving the local villages of Quorn and Woodhouse, this station is built to the standards of Great Central, with an island platform and an overbridge. The station details were intended to make it reflect World War II and the remainder of the 1940s. This has allowed for several World War reenactment s to be played out in recent years. South of the platform is a small set of goods sidings which currently store the TPOs, mineral wagon s and other stock when they are not in use. A turntable has been installed at Quorn &amp; Woodhouse Station and officially opened in the latter part of October 2011. [ Rothley ] Similar in appearance to Quorn &amp; Woodhouse, Rothley was rebuilt by the volunteers of the Great Central to look like the Edwardian era, when it is believed the GCR company was at its high-point. Today the Ellis tea room serves refreshments year-round and a garden railway run by a small group of enthusiasts runs various types of stock. A large 4-road carriage shed of corrugated metal owned by RVP Ltd is the major restoration facility for their historic collection of Gresley Teaks and Mk1s. Just south of Belgrave and Birstall station is the new Leicester North terminus, built because the original station was heavily vandalised. Currently little more than a small waiting room and canopy in 60s style, though more details are being added when they become feasible. [ Film and television ] Many filmmakers have taken advantage of the atmosphere of the Great Central and it has had many notable appearances in film and television. [ Film ] Buster (1988) The Secret Agent (1993) Shadowlands (1993) The Navigators (1999) Enigma (2001) The Hours (2002) Cemetery Junction (2009) [ TV ] [ http://www.thisisleicestershire.co.uk/Gear-trio-pull-latest-stunt-Great-Central-Railway/story-12781689-detail/story.html Top Gear trio pull latest stunt at Great Central Railway Leicester Mercury 22 July 2011 ] She&apos;s Out (1994) Woof! (1995) Goodnight Mr. Tom (1998) Take a Girl Like You (2000) The Cazalet Chronicles (2001) Casualty (2001) Hawking (2004) The 4:50 from Paddington (2004) E=MC2 (2004) &apos;&apos; The 39 Steps (2008) Central Steam (TV Series) (2010) South Riding (TV miniseries) (2011) Top Gear (2011) [ Locomotives and rolling stock ] Main article: List of Great Central Railway locomotives and rolling stock The Great Central Railway has a reasonable running length with the added bonus of a mainline setup, and so some of Britain&apos;s largest locomotives have been there in recent years. The steam fleet currently comprises over a dozen mainline classes, many of them either heavy freight, express passenger or shunting tank engine s. Some are of types that were preserved in abundance elsewhere, but others have been leased from the National Collection. On most days a green-liveried, two-car British Rail Class 101 DMU runs from Loughborough to Leicester as a shuttle train service; this allows more time to light the steam locomotive(s) that would be running that day. The same railcar also sees service throughout the day during most gala events. Locomotives generally face south as that is the better way round for photography of them travelling smokebox-first. As well as running stock the railway also has a large collection of heritage rolling stock. Passenger stock is made up of three uniform rakes of British Rail Mark 1 coaches originally built in the 1950s and 60s. The first of these is in BR lined maroon livery with a brake coach which doubles as wheelchair users&apos; accommodation and a refurbished restaurant buffet car, which with its griddle facilities and kitchen staff can handle anything from full breakfast s to Sunday roast s. This rake is used every operating day. The second most-commonly used is the Carmine and Cream (sometimes known as Blood and Custard) dining train with Restaurant Kitchen Buffet (RKB). It is also used on high season days as it has ample seats for second class ticket holders. The final rake is in Southern Region BR Green livery which is not often seen at anything other than major galas. The Restaurant Miniature Buffet (RMB) which runs with this set is sometimes mixed into the Carmine and Cream rake for second class dining. With a collection of more than 120 ex- British Railways goods wagons, the railway can recreate convincing period slow goods trains. Among the highlights of the collection is a set of 16 ton grey mineral wagons purchased using money raised by readers of Steam Railway Magazine. [ Supporting bodies ] Both the Great Central Railway PLC and the Great Central Railway (Nottingham) have a number of supporting bodies which are based at each individual line. The majority of these are locomotive or rolling stock groups, however there are a number of private owners who have based their stock or locomotives at the lines. [ Main Line Steam Trust ] Main Line Steam Trust was established in 1969 as the Main Line Preservation Group, with the intention of preserving one of two potential sections of the line, one based at Lutterworth, running from Leicester to Rugby Central, and one based at Loughborough, running between Leicester and Nottingham. The Loughborough base was chosen and work began on restoring the station, an office was rented at street level at Loughborough Central station, and in 1971 Charitable Status was granted to MLPG, who changed their name to Main Line Steam Trust Limited. Substantial monthly payments were required to keep the formation intact between Loughborough and Belgrave &amp; Birstall, with steam hauled services operating from Loughborough Central to Quorn &amp; Woodhouse Station, and eventually Rothley station. The money required to purchase the line south of Rothley was not available and only the Loughborough to Rothley section of line was preserved, with the aid of Charnwood Borough Council. The operation and the assets were transferred to the Great Central Railway (1976) Ltd. and MLST took on the role of the charitable volunteer run support body for the railway. MLST has continued to support the Great Central Railway PLC (the 1976 was eventually dropped from the title), and the various organisations around the railway. It also supports the Great Central Railway (Nottingham). MLST have funded a great deal at the Great Central Railway, including assistance in funding the double track, Leicester Station, Quorn &amp; Woodhouse Signalling, Swithland Signalling, Loughborough South Remodelling, and has assisted in bringing in visiting locomotives for gala events on numerous occasions. [ Great Central Railway PLC ] The company made a profit during trading year ending 2007 of £62,000, the first genuine profit in 30 years as a visitor attraction. [ The Gresley Society ] A small group based at Loughborough who are devoted to LNER Chief Mechanical Engineer, Sir Nigel Gresley. They also own large suburban tank locomotive GNR Class N2 No. 1744. [ Renaissance Railcars ] Renaissance Railcars own the five Class 101 vehicles at the Great Central Railway PLC, at present only one set, known as “Set A” (affectionately also known as “The Green Goddess”), is in regular passenger use, however progress is being made on the other vehicles based at the line. A third 101 driving trailer unit is in storage for use as a source of spare parts. They also own 59575 a 111 centre coach, and it is currently being restored, to be eventually worked with the &quot; Green Goddess &quot; or &quot; Daisy &quot;. [ Boscastle Locomotive Syndicate ] Owners and carers of Bullied Pacific locomotive 34039 Boscastle, which is undergoing a protracted overhaul due to take 3 years and £200,000+ of donated money. [ 73156 Standard 5 Support Group ] Formed in 1985, the group owns BR standard class 5 No. 73156 which has been undergoing extensive restoration since arrival and numerous storage vans. [ Loughborough Standard Locomotive Group ] Loughborough Standard Locomotive Group, or LSLG, look after and part-own a number of locomotives. These are BR Standard 2MT No.78019, BR Standard 5MT No.73156, BR Standard 7P6F No.70013 “Oliver Cromwell” and LMS 2MT No.46521 At present only No.78019 is in running condition and can regularly be found operating passenger trains, although the other locomotives are making progress. No.70013 “Oliver Cromwell” is part of the national collection, owned by the National Railway Museum, and is being restored by both LSLG and the 5305 Locomotive Association. LSLG also have in their care a Directors Saloon, coach no. M999504, which is on loan from EWS. [ 5305 Locomotive Association ] The 5305 Locomotive Association have a number of locomotives in their care, these are LMS “Black 5” No.45305 “Alderman A.E. Draper”, SR King Arthur No.777 “Sir Lamiel”, BR Class 33 D6535 “Hertfordshire Railtours”, BR Standard 7P6F No.70013 “Oliver Cromwell”, and BR Class 45 &quot; Leicestershire And Derbyshire Yeomanry &quot; Peak D123. Nos.777, D6535 and 70013 are all part of the National Collection and are owned by the National Railway Museum. Recently No.777 emerged from a lengthy overhaul in British Railways Brunswick green livery, under the BR number 30777. [ Type One Locomotive Company ] A diesel group who own and care for Class 20 D8098, Class 31 D5380 and Class 47 D1705. [ Railway Vehicle Preservations LTD ] Railway Vehicle Preservations LTD, and their members, own the second largest collection of LNER coaches in preservation today. These include the famous LNER Travelling Post Office set, two LNER Beavertail observation saloon (including one in its rebuilt condition), and a number of “Gresley” teak-panel passenger coaches. [ References ] [ August 2008 ] [ External links ] [ Great Central Railway (preserved) ] Homepage of preserved Great Central Railway in Leicestershire. The railway extending Main Line Steam Trust, the GCR&apos;s charitable body. Nottingham Transport Heritage Centre. BBC site with stuff. &quot; Bridging the Gap &quot; - The project to reinstate the missing embankment and bridge. Several hundred pictures from the GCR Sound Recordings of the Great Central Railway Progress on the Nunckley Hill project Category:Heritage railways in England Category:Visitor attractions in Leicestershire Category:Rail transport in Leicestershire Category:Visitor attractions in Nottinghamshire