[ Thailand ] { Capital } { Chainat (town) } { Governor } { Chamlong Phosuk (since  October 2009) } { 2469.7 } { Ranked 64th } { 359829 } { 2000 } { Ranked 62nd } { auto } { Ranked 26th } { Thailand Standard Time } { +7 } { TH-18 } Chainat ( Thai ชัยนาท ( Pronunciation )) is one of the central provinces (changwat) of Thailand. Neighboring provinces are (from north clockwise) Nakhon Sawan, Sing Buri, Suphan Buri and Uthai Thani. [ Geography ] Chai Nat is located in the flat river plain of central Thailand&apos;s Chao Phraya River valley. In the south of the province the Chao Phraya Dam (formerly Chai Nat Dam) impounds the Chao Phraya river, both for flood control as well as to divert water into the country&apos;s largest irrigation system for the irrigation of rice paddies in the lower river valley. The dam, part of the Greater Chao Phraya Project, was finished in 1957 and was the first dam constructed in Thailand. [ Climate ] [ Chai Nat (1961-1990) Y Y 31 33 35 34 34 33 32 31 31 30 30 30 19 20 22 24 24 24 23 23 23 22 20 19 5 11 22 43 135 96 145 171 271 158 37 8 June 2011 ] [ History ] Originally the city was located at Sankhaburi. In the reign of King Mongkut (Rama IV) the main settlement of the province was moved to its present-day location. During the wars with the Burmese it was an important military base for confronting the Burmese Army. As all these confrontations were successful the city gained the name Chai Nat, which means place of victory. [ Symbols ] The provincial seal shows the Buddhist wheel, the Dhammajakra. In the background are Khao Phlong mountain and river (Chao Phraya River). The wheel symbolizes the faith of the residents. The provincial tree is the Bael Fruit Tree (Aegle marmelos), and the provincial flower the Rainbow Shower Tree (Cassia javanica). The slogan of the province is Venerable Luangpu Suk, Renowned Chao Phraya Dam, Famous Bird Park and Tasty Khao Taengkwa Pomelo. [ Administrative divisions ] Map of Amphoe Chainat is subdivided into 8 districts ( amphoe ). The districts are further subdivided into 53 subdistricts ( tambon ) and 474 villages ( muban ). | Mueang Chainat Manorom Wat Sing Sapphaya &lt; li &gt; Sankhaburi &lt; li &gt; Hankha &lt; li &gt; Nong Mamong &lt; li &gt; Noen Kham [ Tourism ] [ Sights ] Chainat Bird Garden or “Suan Nok ChaiNat”. This place is the most famous traveling place in Chainat. It is the biggest Bird park in Asia. There are many bird species here, This garden is open from 8 AM – 5 PM Chainat Water Park. It is located adjacent to the Bird Park and is currently under construction. It will feature various slides and swimming pools. Chainatmunee National Museum. It is in area of Wat PhrabharomThatviharn The museum is a two-storey building. The second floor was the place for the Buddha from Tarawadee time till present. The first floor is for the Sankalok Buddha, ornaments, and ancient tools. Wat ThammaMulviharn. The main temple of Chainat since Ayudhaya time. This temple was located at Thammamul hill slope, on the bank of Chaophraya river. Chaophraya Dam. There are ten thousand teals here in January. The viewpoints here attract visiting travelers. Chai Nat Bird Park (สวนนกชัยนาท) This sanctuary has the biggest aviary in Asia (26 rai) allowing various bird species to live in their natural habitat. Wat Thammamun Worawihan (วัดธรรมามูลวรวิหาร)The temple enshrines Luangpho Thammachak, a standing Buddha image in a posture of persuading relatives not to quarrel, with a lotus-shaped base. Another attraction is the boundary marker, which is made from red sandstone in the Ayutthayan style, around the ordination hall or Phra Ubosot. Wat Phra Borommathat Worawihan (วัดพระบรมธาตุวรวิหาร) There is an old pagoda in the U Thong style housing Lord Buddha&apos;s relics highly worshipped by people from Chai Nat and other neighbouring provinces. The annual fair to worship the Lord Buddha&apos;s relics are held during the full moon day of the sixth lunar month. Chai Nat Muni National Museum (พิพิธภัณฑสถานแห่งชาติ ชัยนาทมุนี)This archaeological museum is a 2-storey adapted Thai-style building. Downstairs displays celadon Buddha images, tools, and ornaments from the Dvaravati to Rattanakosin period. While upstairs displays various Buddhist votive tablets from the Dvaravati to Rattanakosin period. Wat Pak Khlong Makham Thao or Wat Luangpu Suk (วัดปากคลองมะขามเฒ่า หรือ วัดหลวงปู่ศุข)This shady temple offers pleasant scenery and is famous for Buddha amulets. Other attractions are Luangpu Suk’s traditional Thai style residence, as well as, the mural paintings depicting the story of the Lord Buddha made by H.R.H. the Prince of Chumphon and his entourage. Wasan Crocodile Farm (ฟาร์มจระเข้วสันต์) It is located at No. 121, Mu 3, Tambon Makham Thao. There are different kinds of animals such as crocodiles, tigers, rays, and various bird species. Wat Intharam (วัดอินทาราม (ตลุก))This century-old temple features outstanding attractions like the twin belfries, century-old Chinese pavilion, and an 8 x 9-metre Thai-architectural scripture hall built in the middle of a pond. Chao Phraya Dam (เขื่อนเจ้าพระยา)is The nation’s first large dam. Water is released from the Northern region to the Central lower basin and the Gulf of Thailand for the purposes of irrigation, agriculture, conservation of marine animals, and generating hydroelectric power for the province. Wat Karuna (วัดกรุณา) This temple houses Chai Nat’s largest sandstone Buddha image named Phra Phutthamaha Sila or Luangpho Hin Yai, which is highly revered by the local people. Khun San Statue (อนุสาวรีย์ขุนสรรค์)Khun San or Hero of the Noi River is one of the Bang Rachan folk leaders who fought courageously 7 times against the Burmese. He was the first volunteer from Amphoe Sankhaburi dating back 223 years ago. Wat Phra Mahathat (วัดพระมหาธาตุ)is the royal temple of Mueang Phraek or Mueang San. The temple houses a distinguished prang with a fluted spire like the shape of a star fruit. The prang housing Lord Buddha’s relics is made from brick on a square shaped base (a plinth) in the Lop Buri style. Wat Song Phi Nong (วัดสองพี่น้อง)Legend has it that Chao Sam, one of the three siblings, incited the other two siblings named Chao Ai and Chao Yi against each other for the throne. Both Chao Ai and Chao Yi died and Chao Sam became the ruler. Chao Sam then built one prang and one chedi for his late brothers. Wat Phra Kaeo (วัดพระแก้ว)is another ancient temple housing a beautiful square-based stupa. In front of the stupa stands a Buddha image hall known as Wihan Luangpho Chai, where a delicately carved sandstone lintel was found at the back of the image. Monkey Park (สวนลิง) The temple houses rubber plantations and is home to a number of monkeys. Its pleasant area next to the Noi River houses a much revered Luangpho Thao Buddha image. &apos;Wat Klai Kangwon (วัดไกลกังวล) or Khao Saraphat Si Charoen Tham (เขาสารพัดศรีเจริญธรรม) &apos; On top of the hill sees ruins of an ordination hall and the Lord Buddha’s footprints, as well as, a panoramic view of the area. There is the annual Tak Bat Devo ceremony, which literally means offering of food to Buddhist monks. Wat Phichaiyanawat (Wat Ban Chian) (วัดพิชัยนาวาส) (วัดบันเชี่ยน)The ordination hall or Phra Ubosot built in the middle of the pond enshrined the principle Buddha image of Luangpho To, which is in the posture of accepting offerings from an elephant and a monkey. [ Local Products ] Chai Nat’s handicraft products are unique, good quality, and value for money. Each district offers different products as follows: Dakkhanon Mattress (ที่นอนดักคะนน) Stuffed with kapok, this mattress is made by the locals of Ban Dakkhanon, Tambon Thammamun. Benjarong Pentachrome Ceramics (เครื่องเบญจรงค์) These five-coloured ceramics are made in the finest and most sophisticated craftsmanship. Every piece of the ceramics is hand painted with a traditional Thai design. They come in plates, bowls, cups, jars, and tea sets Reed Mat and Bamboo Weavivng Products (เสื่อกกและเครื่องจักสาน)Amphoe Manorom features beautifully good quality products from reed and bamboo such as reed mats, bags, baskets, shallow bamboo baskets, fruit trays, and fans. Manorom’s Pomelo (ส้มโอมโนรมย์)The most famous is the Khao Taengkwa variety with its sweet-crispy taste, large size, and is available throughout. The annual fair is held in August. Water Hyacinth Woven Product (ผลิตภัณฑ์ผักตบชวา)By making good use of this local plant, water hyacinths are made into a variety of affordable and delicate handicraft products and household decorations such as bags, baskets, slippers, flower pots, trays in the shape of a chicken, and vases Herbal Shampoo Products (ผลิตภัณฑ์แชมพูสมุนไพร)Made from kaffir limes, aloe, butterfly pea, turmeric, and soapberry, these renowned good quality herbal shampoo, conditioner, and bath gel, are products of the Tha Sai. Pottery (เครื่องปั้นดินเผา) These famous, durable, and stylishly designed pottery products such as flower pots, mugs, plates, watering utensils, and household decorations. Huai Krot Sugar This palm sugar in soft cakes is derived from sugar palm trees, which are grown extensively in Tambon Huai Krot. Traditionally produced, Huai Krot Sugar is very sweet and aromatic, and an essential ingredient for making Thai desserts. Brown Rice Brown rice is very nutritious because it is traditionally milled. Artificial Flowers and Trees These are made from various materials such as plastic or sa paper. Hand-woven TextileUtilizing their spare time from cultivation, local housewives produce the uniquely traditional hand-woven textile such as the tube skirt or pha sin with the decorative piece woven in discontinuous supplementary weft technique known as tin chok, which is the influence of Laotian ancestors, who previously migrated to Chai Nat. [ Culture ] [ Festivals ] Straw Bird Fair, Chai Nat’s Product Fair and Red Cross Fair (งานมหกรรมหุ่นฟางนกนานาชาติ งานของดี และงานกาชาดจังหวัดชัยนาท)This annual fair is organized by making good use of straw, a by-product in rice farming. Various species of huge straw birds will come perching on elaborately decorated floats during the straw bird procession and the competition is held in front of Chai Nat City Hall. The event is held annually during Chinese New Year in February. Chai Nat Pomelo Fair (งานส้มโอชัยนาท)Chai Nat is one of several provinces famous for producing exceptional pomelo. The best known are of the Khao Taengkwa variety having a well-rounded shape, smooth skin, thin peel, sweet-crispy taste and a little sour, but not bitter. The fair is held during late August - early September in front of Chai Nat City Hall and features many activities such as pomelo contest, varieties of exhibitions by provincial authorities, and young shoot and pomelo sales. [ External links ] [ Chainat ] Chainat Bird Park Province page from the Tourist Authority of Thailand { * Website of province (Thai only) } Chainat provincial map, coat of arms and postal stamp [ Chainat Province Nakhon Sawan Province Singburi Province Suphanburi Province Uthai Thani Province ] [ 15 11 06 N 100 07 29 E region:TH_type:adm1st title ] Category:Provinces of Thailand ace:Propinsi Chainat ar:محافظة تشاينات zh-min-nan:Chainat Hú bg:Чайнат de:Chainat (Provinz) es:Provincia de Chainat fa:چاینات fr:Province de Chainat gl:Provincia Chai Nat ko:차이낫 주 bpy:চাংৱাত চিনয়াত it:Provincia di Chainat ms:Chainat nl:Changwat Chainat ja:チャイナート県 no:Chainat (provins) pnb:صوبہ چائی ناٹ pt:Chai Nat (província) ru:Чайнат (провинция) sco:Chainat Province sv:Chai Nat th:จังหวัดชัยนาท tg:Вилояти Чаинат vi:Chainat (tỉnh) war:Chainat (lalawigan) zh:猜納府