The gens Mamilia was a plebeian family at Rome during the period of the Republic. The gens was originally one of the most distinguished families of Tusculum, and indeed in the whole of Latium. It is first mentioned in the time of the Tarquins; and it was to a member of this family, Octavius Mamilius, that Lucius Tarquinius Superbus, the seventh and last King of Rome, betrothed his daughter. The gens obtained Roman citizenship in the 5th century BC, and some of its members must subsequently have settled at Rome, where Lucius Mamilius Vitulus became the first of the family to hold the consulship in 265 BC, the year before the First Punic War. { Titus Livius, } { Ab Urbe Condita, i. 49, iii. 29. } { Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology, } { William Smith, Editor. } [ Origin of the gens ] The Mamilii traced their nomen and origin to the mythical Mamilia, the daughter of Telegonus, who was regarded as the legendary founder of Tusculum and the son of Ulysses and the goddess Circe. This origin was referred to on a coin of the gens, the obverse of which depicts the head of Mercury or Hermes, the ancestor of Ulysses, and the reverse Ulysses himself, clad in the humble disguise he assumed to avoid being recognized by the suitors of Penelope. { Titus Livius, } { Ab Urbe Condita, i. 49. } { Joseph Hilarius Eckhel, Doctrina Numorum Veterum, vol. v. pp. 242, 243. } [ Praenomina used by the gens ] The earliest of the Mamilii to occur in history bore the praenomen Octavius, which was rare at Rome. His descendants used the praenomina Lucius, Quintus, Gaius, and Marcus, all of which were very common names throughout Roman history. { Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology, } { William Smith, Editor. } { Realencyclopädie der Classischen Altertumswissenschaft. } [ Branches and cognomina of the gens ] The Mamilii were divided into three families, with the cognomina Limetanus, Turrinus, and Vitulus, of which the two latter were the most ancient and important. Limetanus is the only surname which occurs on coins. { Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology, } { William Smith, Editor. } Vitulus was a surname in both the Mamilia and Voconia gentes. Niebuhr supposes that Vitulus is merely another form of Italus, and remarks that we find in the same manner in the Mamilia gens the surname Turrinus; that is, Tyrrhenus, an Etruscan. &quot; It was customary, as is proved by the oldest Roman Fasti, for the great houses to take distinguishing surnames from a people with whom they were connected by blood, or by the ties of public hospitality. &quot; { Barthold Georg Niebuhr, History of Rome, vol. i. p. 14. } The ancients, however, connected the surname Vitulus with the Latin word signifying a &quot; calf &quot;, which was depicted on a coin of one of the Voconii Vituli. Although the connection of Turrinus and Tyrrhenus is by no means impossible, or even unlikely, it could also have been derived from turris, &quot; a tower &quot;. An ancient tower known as the Turris Mamilia stood in the Subura, and figured in a ritual battle between the residents of two neighborhoods at Rome for the head of the October Horse. { Joseph Hilarius Eckhel, Doctrina Numorum Veterum, vol. v. pp. 344. } { D.P. Simpson, Cassell&apos;s Latin &amp; English Dictionary (1963). } [ Members of the gens ] Octavius Mamilius, a prince of Tusculum, and son-in-law of Lucius Tarquinius Superbus. He was dictator of the Latin army at the Battle of Lake Regillus, in 498 BC, and was slain by Titus Herminius Aquilinus. Lucius Mamilius, perhaps the grandson of Octavius, was dictator of Tusculum in 460 BC, and sent an army to help recover the Capitol from a force of Sabines during a revolt. The following year the Romans helped him recover the citadel of Tusculum from the Aequi. In recognition of his service, in 458 the senate granted him Roman citizenship. Titus Livius, Ab Urbe Condita, iii. 18, 29. Dionysius of Halicarnassus, Romaike Archaiologia, x. 16. Gaius Mamilius, plebeian aedile in 207 BC. Titus Livius, Ab Urbe Condita, xxvii. 36. Lucius Mamilius, triumvir monetalis, probably between 189 and 180 BC. [ Mamilii Vituli ] Marcus Mamilius Vitulus, grandfather of the consuls of 265 and 262 BC. Quintus Mamilius M. f. Vitulus, father of the consul of 265 and 262 BC. Lucius Mamilius Q. f. M. n. Vitulus, consul in 265 BC, the year before the beginning of the First Punic War. Joannes Zonaras, Epitome Historiarum, viii. 7. Quintus Mamilius Q. f. M. n. Vitulus, consul in 262 BC, during the First Punic War. With his colleague, Lucius Postumius Megellus, he took the city of Agrigentum. Polybius, The Histories, i. 17-20. Joannes Zonaras, Epitome Historiarum, viii. 10. Zonaras erroneously calls him Quintus Aemilius. Gaius Mamilius Vitulus, father of the praetor of 207 BC. Gaius Mamilius C. f. Vitulus, the first plebeian elected curio maximus, in 209 BC, during the Second Punic War; he was praetor in 207, and received Sicily as his province. In 203 he was one of the ambassadors sent to Philip, King of Macedon. He died in the pestilence of 174 BC. Titus Livius, Ab Urbe Condita, xxvii. 8, 35, 36, 38, xxx. 26, xli. 26. Some sources give his surname as Atellus. See T. Robert S. Broughton, The Magistrates of the Roman Republic (1952), Realencyclopädie der Classischen Altertumswissenschaft, s. v. Mamilius no. 5. [ Mamilii Turrini ] Quintus Mamilius Turrinus, grandfather of the consul of 239 BC. Quintus Mamilius Q. f. Turrinus, father of the consul of 239 BC. Gaius Mamilius Q. f. Q. n. Turrinus, consul in 239 BC. Fasti Capitolini. Aulus Gellius, Noctes Atticae, xvii. 21, 43. Gellius gives his name as Manilius. Quintus Mamilius Turrinus, plebeian aedile in 207 and praetor in 206 BC; by lot he obtained the jurisdictio peregrina, but he was sent by the senate into Gaul. Titus Livius, Ab Urbe Condita, xxviii. 10. [ Mamilii Limetani ] Gaius Mamilius Limetanus, tribunus plebis in 110 BC; he carried a law inquiring into the cases of persons who had assisted Jugurtha in his opposition to the senate, and who had received bribes from him to neglect their duty to the state. Gaius Sallustius Crispus, Jugurthine War, 40, 65. Marcus Tullius Cicero, Brutus, 33, 34. Gaius Mamilius C. f. Limetanus, triumvir monetalis in 82 BC. [ See also ] List of Roman gentes [ Footnotes ] Category:Roman gentes Category:Ancient Roman families Category:Prosopography of Ancient Rome bg:Мамилии ca:Gens Mamília de:Mamilius nl:Gens Mamilia