La Cenerentola, ossia La bontà in trionfo (Cinderella, or Goodness Triumphant) is an opera tic dramma giocoso in two acts by Gioachino Rossini. The libretto was written by Jacopo Ferretti, based on the fairy tale Cinderella. The opera was first performed in Rome&apos;s Teatro Valle on 25 January 1817. Rossini composed La Cenerentola when he was 25 years old, following the success of The Barber of Seville the year before. La Cenerentola, which he completed in a period of three weeks, is considered to have some of his finest writing for solo voice and ensembles. Rossini saved some time by reusing an overture from La gazzetta and part of an aria from The Barber of Seville and by enlisting a collaborator, Luca Agolini, who wrote the secco recitatives and three numbers (Alidoro&apos;s &quot; Vasto teatro è il mondo &quot;, Clorinda&apos;s &quot; Sventurata! &quot; and the chorus &quot; Ah, della bella incognita. &quot; ) The facsimile edition of the autograph has a different aria for Alidoro, &quot; Fa&apos; silenzio, odo un rumore &quot;; this seems to have been added by an anonymous hand for a 1818 production. For a 1820 revival in Rome, Rossini wrote a bravura replacement, &quot; La, del ciel nell&apos;arcano profondo &quot;. The light, energetic overture has been in the standard repertoire since its premiere as La Cenerentola. [ Performance history ] At the first performance, the opera was received with some hostility, { &quot; The prima on 25 January 1817 was full of mishaps and was noisily received &quot; – } [ Osborne Richard 1986 Rossini Dent London 37 ISBN 0-460-03179-1 ] but it soon became popular throughout Italy and beyond; it reached Lisbon in 1819, { Blog da Rua Nove: La Cenerentola, Cinderella, A Gata Borralheira (in portuguese) } London in 1820 and New York in 1826. Through most of the 19th century, its popularity rivalled that of the Barber, but as the coloratura contralto, for which the role was originally written, became rare it fell slowly out of the repertoire. However, from the 1960s onward, as Rossini enjoyed a renaissance, a new generation of Rossini mezzo-soprano s and contralto s ensured the renewed popularity of the work. There are changes from the traditional fairy tale in La Cenerentola because Rossini opted for having a non-magical resolution to the story (unlike the original source), due to obvious limitations in the &quot; special effects &quot; available. There are a number of recordings of the opera, and, as a staple of the standard operatic repertoire, it appears as number 29 on the Operabase list of the most-performed operas worldwide. [ Opera Statistics http://operabase.com/top.cgi?lang%3Den#opera Operabase 8 May 2011 ] [ Roles ] Role Voice type Premiere cast, 25 January 1817 ( Conductor : Gioachino Rossini) Angelina (Cenerentola, Cinderella ) contralto / mezzo-soprano Geltrude Righetti Prince Ramiro tenor Giacomo Guglielmi Dandini, valet to the Prince baritone Giuseppe De Begnis Don Magnifico, Cenerentola&apos;s stepfather bass Andrea Verni Alidoro, philosopher and the Prince&apos;s former tutor bass Zenobio Vitarelli Clorinda, Don Magnifico&apos;s older daughter soprano Caterina Rossi Tisbe, Don Magnifico&apos;s younger daughter mezzo-soprano Teresa Mariani Courtiers from Prince Ramiro&apos;s palace tenors, basses [ Synopsis ] In this variation of the traditional Cinderella story, the wicked stepmother is replaced by a stepfather, Don Magnifico. The Fairy Godmother is replaced by Alidoro, a philosopher and the Prince&apos;s tutor. Cinderella is identified not by her glass slipper but by her bracelet. Time: Late 18th century – early 19th century Place: Italy [ Act 1 ] Angelina ( &quot; Cenerentola &quot; ) is forced to work as the maid in the run-down house of her stepfather Don Magnifico. While his two daughters, Clorinda and Tisbe, try on their gowns and jewelry, Cenerentola sings a ballad about a king who found his wife among common folk. A beggar appears. Clorinda and Tisbe want to send him away, but Cenerentola offers him bread and coffee. Courtiers arrive to announce that Prince Ramiro is looking for the most beautiful girl in the land to be his bride and will soon pay them a visit. Prince Ramiro arrives, disguised as his own valet in order to observe the women without them knowing. He is immediately struck with admiration for Cenerentola and she for him. Cenerentola leaves when her stepsisters call her. Don Magnifico enters and Ramiro tells him the Prince will arrive shortly. The &quot; prince &quot; is actually Dandini, Ramiro&apos;s valet in disguise. The stepsisters arrive and fawn over Dandini, who invites them to a ball at the royal country palace. Don Magnifico tells Cenerentola that she cannot accompany them to the ball. Before leaving, Ramiro notes how badly Cenerentola is treated. His tutor, Alidoro, who had been at the house earlier disguised as the beggar, arrives still wearing his rags and asks for Don Magnifico&apos;s third daughter. Magnifico denies she is still alive, but when Alidoro is left alone with Cenerentola, he tells her that she will accompany him to the ball. He throws off his beggar&apos;s clothes and identifies himself as a member of Prince Ramiro&apos;s court, telling her that heaven will reward her pure heart. The stepsisters and Don Magnifico arrive at Prince Ramiro&apos;s palace with Dandini, still posing as the prince. Dandini offers Magnifico a tour of the wine cellar, hoping to get him drunk. He then disentangles himself from the family and tells Ramiro how stupid the two sisters are. Ramiro is confused since Alidoro had spoken well of one of Magnifico&apos;s daughters. Clorinda and Tisbe enter, and Dandini offers Ramiro as an escort for one of them. Believing him to be a mere valet, they reject him. Alidoro announces the arrival of an unknown veiled lady (Cenerentola). All sense something familiar about her and feel they are in a dream but on the verge of being awakened with a shock. [ Act 2 ] Don Magnifico, Clorinda, and Tisbe are in a room of Ramiro&apos;s palace. Magnifico frets over the unknown woman who threatens the chance for one of his daughters to marry Prince Ramiro. The three leave and Ramiro enters, smitten with the unknown woman who resembles the girl he had met that morning. He conceals himself as Dandini arrives with Cenerentola and tries to court her. She turns Dandini down politely, telling him that she is in love with his valet. Ramiro steps forth and declares his love for her. She then leaves giving him one of a pair of matching bracelets and saying that if he really cares for her, he will find her. Encouraged by Alidoro, Ramiro calls his men together to begin searching for her. Meanwhile, Dandini confesses to Don Magnifico that he is really Prince Ramiro&apos;s valet. Magnifico becomes highly indignant, and Dandini orders him out of the palace. At Magnifico&apos;s house, Cenerentola, once again dressed in rags, is tending the fire and singing her ballad. Magnifico and his daughters return from the ball in a vile mood, and order Cenerentola to prepare their supper. A thunderstorm rages. Dandini suddenly appears at the door to say that Prince Ramiro&apos;s carriage has overturned outside and brings him into the house. Cenerentola fetches a chair for the prince and realizes he is Ramiro. He recognizes her bracelet and the couple are reunited. Don Magnifico, Clorinda and Tisbe are furious. Angered by their meanness to Cenerentola, Ramiro threatens to punish them, but Cenerentola asks him to be merciful. As Cenerentola leaves with her prince, Alidoro thanks heaven for the happy outcome. In the throne room of Ramiro&apos;s palace, Magnifico tries to curry favour with his stepdaughter, the new princess, but she only wants to be acknowledged as his daughter. Cenerentola asks the prince to forgive Magnifico and the two stepsisters. Her father and stepsisters embrace her as she declares that her days of toiling by the fire are over. { for a more detailed synopsis see John W. Freeman, &apos;&apos;Stories of the Operas: La Cenerentola&apos;&apos;, New York Metropolitan Opera } [ Noted arias ] &quot; Miei rampolli femminini &quot; – Don Magnifico in act 1 &quot; Come un&apos;ape ne&apos; giorni d&apos;aprile &quot; – Dandini in act 1 &quot; Si, ritrovarla io giuro &quot; – Prince Ramiro in act 2 &quot; Questo è un nodo avviluppato &quot; – Ensemble in act 2 &quot; Nacqui all&apos;affanno … Non piu mesta &quot; – Angelina in act 2 [ Recordings ] Year Cast: Cenerentola, Clorinda, Tisbe, Don Ramiro, Dandini, Don Magnifico Conductor, Opera House and Orchestra Label: Recordings of &apos;&apos;La centerentola&apos;&apos; on operadis-opera-discography.org.uk 1980 Susanne Marsee, Gianna Rolandi, RoseMarie Freni, Rockwell Blake, Alan Titus, James Billings Brian Salesky, New York City Opera Orchestra and Chorus DVD: Premiere Opera Cat: 6825 1981 Frederica von Stade, Margherita Guglielmi, Laura Zannini, Francisco Araiza, Claudio Desderi, Paolo Montarsolo Claudio Abbado, Teatro alla Scala Orchestra and Chorus DVD: DG Cat: 073 4096 1993 Cecilia Bartoli, Fernanda Costa, Gloria Banditelli, William Matteuzzi, Alessandro Corbelli, Enzo Dara Riccardo Chailly, Orchestra and Chorus of the Teatro Comunale di Bologna CD: Decca Records Cat:436 909-2 1996 Jennifer Larmore, Jeannette Fischer, Claire Larcher, Rockwell Blake, Alessandro Corbelli, Carlos Chausson Maurizio Benini, L&apos; Opéra National de Paris Orchestra and Chorus (Video recording of a performance in the Palais Garnier, Paris, April) DVD: Encore Cat: DVD 3265 2004 Joyce DiDonato, Patrizia Cigna, Martina Borst, José Manuel Zapata, Paolo Bordogna, Bruno Praticò Alberto Zedda, Orchester des Südwest Funks Kaisersläutern and Prague Chamber Chorus (Recording of a performance at the Wildbad Festival, 13 November) CD: Naxos Cat: 8.660191-92 2007 Joyce DiDonato, Cristina Obregón, Itxaro Mentxaka, Juan Diego Flórez, David Menéndez, Bruno De Simone Patrick Summers, Orchestra and Chorus of the Teatro Liceu (Barcelona) (Video recording of a performance (or of performances) in the Teatro Liceo, Barcelona, December) DVD: Decca Cat: 074 3305 and 074 3333 (Blu-ray) 2009 Elina Garanca, Rachelle Durkin, Patricia Risley, Lawrence Brownlee, Simone Alberghini, Alessandro Corbelli Maurizio Benini, Metropolitan Opera Orchestra and Chorus (Audio and video recordings made at a performance (or at performances) at the MET, May) CD: Celestial Audio Cat: CA 908; DVD: DG Cat: 073 4777 [ References ] Notes Sources Holden, Amanda (Ed.), The New Penguin Opera Guide, New York: Penguin Putnam, 2001. ISBN 0-14-029312-4 Osborne, Charles, The Bel Canto Operas of Rossini, Donizetti, and Bellini, Portland, Oregon: Amadeus Press, 1994 ISBN 0-931340-71-3 [ External links ] Libretto from Stanford University, in Italian only Old Ricordi edition piano score as pdf Synopsis of La Cenerentola (Metropolitan Opera) [ January 2011 ] Category:Operas by Gioachino Rossini Category:Italian-language operas Category:Drammi giocosi Category:Opera semiseria Category:Cinderella adaptations Category:1817 operas Category:Operas Category:Operas set in Italy ca:La Cenerentola de:La Cenerentola (Oper) es:La Cenicienta (Rossini) fr:La Cenerentola gl:La Cenerentola ko:라 체네렌톨라 hy:Մոխրոտը (օպերա) it:La Cenerentola hu:Hamupipőke (opera) ja:チェネレントラ pl:Kopciuszek (opera) pt:La Cenerentola ro:La Cenerentola ru:Золушка (опера Россини) sv:Askungen (Rossini) tr:Külkedisi (opera)