[ November 2009 ] [ Bisingen ] [ Wappen Buesingen am Hochrhein.png 47 41 49 08 41 25 Lage von büsingen im detail.svg Location of Büsingen in the German–Swiss border area Baden-Württemberg Freiburg Konstanz 395 7.62 1429 2005-12-31 D -78266; CH -8238 07734 ( D ); 052 ( CH ) BÜS 08 3 35 015 Junkerstraße 86 78266 bzw. 8238 Büsingen am Hochrhein www.buesingen.de www.buesingen.ch Gunnar Lang ] Büsingen am Hochrhein Büsingen am Hochrhein, commonly known as Büsingen, is a German town ( [ 7.62 km2 on or ] ) entirely surrounded by the Swiss canton of Schaffhausen and, south across the Rhine, by the cantons of Zürich and Thurgau. It has a population of about 1,450 inhabitants. Since the early 19th century the exclave has been separated from the rest of Germany by a narrow strip of land of about 700 m at its narrowest containing the Swiss village of Dörflingen. Administratively, Büsingen is part of Germany, forming part of the district of Konstanz, in the Bundesland of Baden-Württemberg, but economically, it forms part of the Swiss customs area, as does the independent principality of Liechtenstein. There are no border controls between Switzerland and Büsingen or the rest of Germany since Switzerland joined the Schengen zone in 2008/09. Büsingen is highly regarded as a holiday destination in summer by both German and Swiss visitors from around the area for its recreational areas along the Rhine. The town is also the home of the European Nazarene College, a large (for the town) Bible college with an international focus. [ Curiosities ] Formally the euro is the only legal tender in Büsingen; however, the Swiss franc is far more popular in everyday use as shopping is generally done in nearby Schaffhausen instead of across the border(s) in Germany. Owing to its unusual geographical location, it uses public services from both countries, including public transport, post and telephone services, which operate side by side. To send a letter to Büsingen, one can send it using either a Swiss postal code Junkerstrasse 86 8238 Büsingen am Hochrhein Schweiz or a German one: Junkerstraße 86 78266 Büsingen am Hochrhein Deutschland Similarly, residents of Büsingen can be reached by telephone using either a German number (with the prefix +49 7734) or a Swiss one (with the prefix +41 52). Germans who have been registered in Büsingen for more than 10 years are called Alt Büsinger (Old Büsingers) and receive a special recognised status similar to Swiss citizenship. Alt Büsingers are allowed to purchase real estate or work in Switzerland, even without Swiss citizenship. In emergencies, either the Swiss or the German police may be called; the Swiss, being closer, usually arrive faster. In the case of a search warrant, both German and Swiss officials are required to be present. After attending primary school in Büsingen, children may continue their education in either Switzerland or Germany. About 70% elect to go to school in closer Switzerland. The local football team, FC Büsingen, is the only German team to play in the Swiss Football League. The exclave has been part of the Schengen Area since 12 December 2008, when Switzerland fully implemented the Schengen Agreement. [ April 2012 Switzerland only adopted Schengen as it relates to freedom of movement of persons, it does not implement the freedom of movement for merchandise ] [ History ] Long under Austrian control, the town became part of the German kingdom of Württemberg under the 1805 Peace of Pressburg agreement during the Napoleonic Wars. [ http://opinionator.blogs.nytimes.com/2012/05/15/enclave-hunting-in-switzerland/ Enclave-Hunting in Switzerland May 15, 2012 The New York Times Frank Jacobs ] In 1918 after the First World War a referendum was held in Büsingen in which 96% of voters chose to become part of Switzerland. However, it never happened as Switzerland could not offer anything suitable in exchange, and consequently Büsingen has remained an exclave of Germany ever since. Later attempts were rejected by Switzerland. The exclave of Büsingen was formally defined in 1967 through negotiations between West Germany and Switzerland. At the same time, the West German exclave of Verenahof, consisting of just three houses and fewer than a dozen people, became part of Switzerland. [ See also ] Baarle-Hertog Baarle-Nassau Campione d&apos;Italia Llívia Jungholz Kleinwalsertal Verenahof [ References ] [ External links ] Büsingen Official Website Jan S. Krogh&apos;s GeoSite on Büsingen Category:Canton of Schaffhausen Category:Exclaves Category:Special territories of the European Union Category:Towns in Baden-Württemberg Category:Konstanz (district) Category:Germany–Switzerland border crossings Category:Enclaves ar:بوزنغن أم هوخراين als:Büsingen am Hochrhein ca:Büsingen am Hochrhein cs:Büsingen am Hochrhein da:Büsingen am Hochrhein de:Büsingen am Hochrhein es:Büsingen eo:Büsingen am Hochrhein eu:Büsingen am Hochrhein fr:Büsingen am Hochrhein hr:Büsingen am Hochrhein id:Büsingen am Hochrhein it:Büsingen am Hochrhein he:ביזינגן lmo:Büsingen am Hochrhein hu:Büsingen nl:Büsingen ja:ビュージンゲン no:Büsingen am Hochrhein pl:Büsingen am Hochrhein pt:Büsingen ro:Büsingen am Hochrhein ru:Бюзинген-на-Верхнем-Рейне simple:Büsingen am Hochrhein sk:Büsingen sr:Бисинген ам Хохрајн fi:Büsingen am Hochrhein sv:Büsingen vo:Büsingen am Hochrhein war:Büsingen am Hochrhein zh:布辛根