[ December 2009 ] Events from the year 1966 in Canada. [ Incumbents ] Monarch : Elizabeth II Governor General : Georges Vanier Prime Minister : Lester B. Pearson Premier of Alberta : Ernest Manning Premier of British Columbia : W.A.C. Bennett Premier of Manitoba : Duff Roblin Premier of New Brunswick : Louis Robichaud Premier of Newfoundland : Joey Smallwood Premier of Nova Scotia : Robert Stanfield Premier of Ontario : John Robarts Premier of Prince Edward Island : Walter Shaw then Alex B. Campbell Premier of Quebec : Jean Lesage then Daniel Johnson, Sr. Premier of Saskatchewan : W. Ross Thatcher [ Events ] January 1: The Canada Pension Plan and the Quebec Pension Plan both begin operation February 25: Toronto Transit Commission inaugurates the Bloor-Danforth Subway line. March 4: The Munsinger Affair is Canada&apos;s first major political sex scandal May 1: Army camps, RCAF stations, and the RCN&apos;s land-based installations become Canadian Forces bases. Training schools and the pay system are unified. May 18: Paul Joseph Chartier is killed when a bomb he is carrying goes off on Parliament Hill June 5: The Union Nationale under Daniel Johnson, Sr. is elected in Quebec. Montreal Metro opens June 16: Daniel Johnson, Sr., becomes premier of Quebec, replacing Jean Lesage July 28: Alexander B. Campbell becomes premier of Prince Edward Island, replacing Walter Shaw September 1: The CBC becomes the first Canadian television network to broadcast in colour, followed within days by the private-sector CTV Television Network. October 14: Montreal inaugurates its metro system (see Montreal Metro ). October 17: The Montreal Metro opens November 4: Bill C-243, The Canadian Forces Reorganization Act, is introduced in Parliament. December 31: The Centennial Flame in front of Parliament Hill is lit The Revolutionary Strategy and the Role of the Avant-Garde outlining the strategy of the FLQ is written. The Seasonal Agricultural Workers Program is established. [ Arts and literature ] [ New works ] Cold Mountain. Singing Hands Series 3 by B. P. Nichol The Circle Game by Margaret Atwood Expeditions by Margaret Atwood Speeches for Doctor Frankenstein by Margaret Atwood Beautiful Losers by Leonard Cohen [ Awards ] See 1966 Governor General&apos;s Awards for a complete list of winners and finalists for those awards. Stephen Leacock Award : George Bain, Nursery Rhymes to Be Read Aloud by Young Parents with Old Children Vicky Metcalf Award : Fred Savage [ Music ] March 3: Canadian Neil Young, joins Stephen Stills and Richie Furay to form Buffalo Springfield. [ Television ] Star Trek premieres starring Montreal actor William Shatner [ Sport ] March 12 – Bobby Hull sets the record for the most goals in an NHL season. Grey Cup – Saskatchewan Roughriders win 29–14 over the Ottawa Rough Riders Vanier Cup – St. Francis Xavier X-Men win 40–14 over the Waterloo Lutheran Golden Hawks Stanley Cup – Montreal Canadiens win 4–2 over the Detroit Red Wings [ Births ] [ January to March ] January 23 – Bernadette Bowyer, field hockey player January 24 – Michael Forgeron, rower and Olympic gold medalist January 30 – Doug Wood, pole vaulter February 27 – Donal Logue, actor March 1 – Susan Auch, speed skater and double Olympic silver medalist March 20 – Chris Gifford, field hockey player March 25 – Jeff Healey, jazz and blues-rock guitarist and vocalist (d. 2008 ) March 25 – David Hohl, wrestler March 29 – Pamela Rai, swimmer and Olympic bronze medalist March 31 – Nathalie Gosselin, judoka [ April to June ] April 24 – David Usher, rock singer-songwriter May 2 – Belinda Stronach, politician and Minister, businessperson and philanthropist May 11 – Michelle MacPherson, swimmer and Olympic bronze medalist May 12 – Anne Ottenbrite, swimmer and Olympic gold medalist May 23 – Gary Roberts, ice hockey player June 12 – Michael Redhill, poet, playwright and novelist June 18 – Kurt Browning, figure skater and four-time World Champion, choreographer June 24 – Debbie Fuller, diver June 26 – Kirk McLean, ice hockey player June 29 – John Part, darts player [ July to September ] July 18 – Lila Feng, weather presenter August 27 – Gianni Vignaduzzi, track cyclist September 10 – Joe Nieuwendyk, ice hockey player and manager September 27 – Gerry Byrne, politician [ October to December ] October 17 – Peter Milkovich, field hockey player and coach October 24 – Conrad Pla, kickboxer and actor { The Paley Center for Media, November 2008 } October 25 – Wendel Clark, ice hockey player November 9 – Lisa Faust, field hockey player November 21 – Christopher Bowie, swimmer December 1 – Larry Walker, baseball player December 5 – Deb Whitten, field hockey player December 21 – Kiefer Sutherland, actor [ Full date unknown ] Stéphane Demers, actor [ Deaths ] February – Morris A. Gray, politician (b. 1889 ) April 8 – Robert Methven Petrie, astronomer (b. 1906 ) July 11 – Andrew McNaughton, army officer, politician and diplomat (b. 1887 ) September 5 – William Murdoch Buchanan, politician (b. 1897 ) September 15 – Leonard Brockington, lawyer, civil servant and first head of the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation (CBC) (b. 1888 ) Category:Years of the 20th century in Canada Canada fr:1966 au Canada