Henry Thomas de la Beche Sir Henry Thomas De la Beche FRS (10 February 1796 – 13 April 1855) was an English geologist and palaeontologist who helped pioneer early geological survey methods. [ Biography ] Henry was born in London. His father, an officer in the British Army, was a slave owner with an estate in Jamaica, but died while his son was still young. De la Beche spent his early life living with his mother in Lyme Regis, where he acquired a love for geology through his friendship with Mary Anning. At the age of fourteen he entered the military college at Great Marlow. The peace of 1815, however, changed his career. At the age of twenty-one he joined the Geological Society of London. He became an avid fossil collector and illustrator, collaborating with William Conybeare on an important paper on ichthyosaur and plesiosaur anatomy that was presented before the Society in 1821. { Rudwick, Martin Worlds Before Adam: The Reconstruction of Geohistory in the Age of Reform (2008) pp. 29-30 } [ Notice of the discovery of a new Fossil Animal, forming a link between the Ichthyosaurus and Crocodile, together -with general remarks on the Osteology of the Ichthyosaurus Geological Society of London De la Beche Henry Henry De la Beche Conybeare William 1821 http://www.plesiosaur.com/database/references/delabeche_conybeare_1821/page559.htm 2010-01-10 ] He continued throughout life to be one of its most active, useful and honoured members, serving as president of the Society from 1848 - 1849. He visited many localities of geological interest, not only in Britain, but also overseas, in France, Jamaica and Switzerland. In Jamaica he stayed on his estate, Halse Hall, Clarendon in 1823–1824 { Sir Henry Thomas De la Beche by Lawrence J. Chubb accessed 18 July 2010 } and published his geological account of Jamaica in 1827. Returning to the south-west of England he began the detailed investigation of the rocks of Cornwall and Devon. Contact with the mining community of that part of the country gave him the idea that the nation ought to compile a geological map of the United Kingdom, and collect and preserve specimens to illustrate, and aid in further developing, its mineral industries. [ Surveying ] The government then appointed him in connection with the Ordnance Survey. This formed the starting point of the Geological Survey of Great Britain, which was officially recognized in 1835, when De la Beche was appointed director. { A descriptive guide to the Museum of Practical Geology: with... Museum of Practical Geology (Great Britain), Robert Hunt, Frederick William Rudler &quot; The Museum of Practical Geology was founded, in 1835, in consequence of its having become evident, during the earlier progress of the Geological Survey of Great Britain, that numerous opportunities &quot; } As the first director of the Museum of Practical Geology in Jermyn Street he donated many of his own books to furnish the library in 1843. { Library journal Melvil Dewey, Richard Rogers Bowker, L. Pylodet - 1879 &quot;... was founded in 1843, the earliest books received being a selection from the private library of the first Director of the Institution, Sir Henry Thomas De la Bache, KCB, FRS &quot; } Increasing stores of valuable specimens began to arrive in London; and the building at Craigs Court, where the young Museum of Economic Geology was placed, became too small. De la Beche appealed to the authorities to provide a larger structure and to widen the whole scope of the scientific establishment of which he was the head. Parliament sanctioned the erection of a museum in Jermyn Street, London, and the organization of a staff of professors with laboratories and other appliances. The establishment, in which were combined the offices of the Geological Survey, the Museum of Practical Geology, The Royal School of Mines and the Mining Record Office, was opened in 1851. Conditions of scientific testing were rudimentary; as part of his colleague Dr. Lyon Playfair&apos;s investigations into &quot; overflowing privies &quot; Sir Henry once took the role of test-vomiter to judge sewage flow. { Oz Frankel States of inquiry: social investigations and print culture in - 2006 p156 &quot; Sir Henry de la Bache was obliged in Bristol to stand at the end of alleys and vomit whilst Dr. Playfair was investigating overflowing privies. Sir Henry was obliged to give it up. &quot; } In 1830, de la Beche published Sections and views, illustrative of geological phaenomena, a series of line drawings to encourage more accurate depictions of geological formations. De la Beche published numerous memoirs on English geology in the Transactions of the Geological Society of London, as well as in the Memoirs of the Geological Survey, notably the Report on the Geology of Cornwall, Devon and West Somerset (1839). He likewise wrote Geological Manual&apos;&apos; (1831; 3rd ed., 1833); and Researches in Theoretical Geology (1834), in which he enunciated a philosophical treatment of geological questions much in advance of his time. An early volume, How to Observe Geology (1835 and 1836), was rewritten and enlarged by him late in life, and published under the title of The Geological Observer (1851; 2nd ed., 1853). { Dorset &apos;&apos; is a watercolor painted in 1830 by the geologist Henry De la Beche based on fossils found by } { Mary Anning } De la Beche was the principal antagonist of Roderick Murchison and Adam Sedgwick in what has been labeled The Great Devonian Controversy. He frequently used cartoons as a tactful way to express his frustrations on this and other issues. He was elected Fellow of the Royal Society in 1819. He was knighted in 1848 and, near the close of his life he was awarded the Wollaston medal. In 1852, he was elected a foreign member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences. After his death students at the Royal College of Mines and other institutions competed for the bursary of the De la Beche medal. { Directory Great Britain. Dept. of Science and Art - 1899 &quot; The De la Beche Medal. This bronze medal, established in memory of Sir Henry de la Beche, is awarded annually to the student who does best in Mining &quot; } The medal was in fact the second imprint, of a medal De la Beche had originally had engraved and struck for the slaves he inherited from his father on the plantation in Jamaica on his return to Lyme Regis in 1825. { Jamaican rock stars, 1823-1971: the geologists who explored Jamaica p23 S. K. Donovan - 2010 &quot; THE DECADE 1825–1835 De la Beche landed in England early in 1825 and settled again in Lyme Regis. Soon after his return he had a medal struck for the encouragement of his slaves, with his portrait on one side and the words “A reward for good conduct &quot; } The second version of the medal, in silver and bronze, was engraved by W. Wyon of the Royal Mint - with De la Bache&apos;s portrait on one side, and the plantation on the other - the plantation being replaced with crossed hammers for the School of Mines. [ Cartoons ] De la Beche&apos;s well-known caricature &quot; Awful Changes &quot; A great supporter of the work and importance of Mary Anning, of Lyme Regis, De la Beche drew a sketch, in 1830, entitled Duria Antiquior - A More Ancient Dorset, which showed Mary Anning&apos;s finds: (three types of Ichthyosaur, a Plesiosaur and Dimorphodon ). It even appears to show the production of coprolite s, from a terrified plesiosaur. De la Beche assisted Anning, who was having financial difficulties, by having a lithographic print made from his watercolour, and donating the proceeds from the sale of the prints to her. This became the first such scene from deep time to be widely circulated. { Rudwick, Martin Scenes from Deep Time (1992) pp. 42-47 } He was a great and objective scientist and poked fun at some of the more outlandish theories of the time, such as that put forward by Charles Lyell, proposing that geological and biological history were cyclical and that ancient life forms would again walk the earth. His cartoon, also drawn in 1830, was entitled Awful Changes and depicted an ichthyosaur professor lecturing on a fossilised human skull: &quot; &apos;You will at once perceive&apos; continued Professor Ichthyosaurus, &apos;that the skull before us belonged to some of the lower order of animals; the teeth are very insignificant, the power of the jaws trifling, and altogether it seems wonderful how the creature could have procured food.&apos; &quot; [ Notes ] [ Further reading ] Gass, K.C. Fragments of History (Specialized Quality Publications, 2000, ISBN 0-9634906-4-8) [ External links ] [ Beche, Henry de la ] Linda Hall Library of Science, Engineering and Technology An example of drawings from Sections and views, illustrative of geological phaenomena &apos;&apos;Duria Antiquior - &apos;a more ancient Dorsetshire&apos;&apos;&apos; an 1830 watercolour, by Henry Thomas de la Beche, of the seas of ancient Dorset, designed to highlight Mary Anning&apos;s discoveries &apos;&apos;Awful Changes&apos;&apos; - a depiction of the cartoon Henry De la Beche&apos;s &apos;&apos;A geological manual&apos;&apos; (Philadelphia, 1832). [ Delabeche, Henry 10 February 1796 13 April 1855 ] Category:1796 births Category:1855 deaths Category:English geologists Category:English palaeontologists Category:Fellows of the Royal Society Category:Knights Bachelor Category:Wollaston Medal winners Category:Presidents of the Geological Society of London Category:Members of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences de:Henry Thomas de la Bèche es:Henry de la Beche fr:Henry De la Beche nl:Henry De la Beche ja:ヘンリー・デ・ラ・ビーチ pt:Henry De la Beche ru:Генри де ла Беш sv:Henry Thomas De la Beche