[ Serbia Serbian Armed Forces &apos;Bojcka СрбијеVojska Srbije 180px 1838 2006 Army Air Force and Air Defence River Flotilla Training Command Belgrade, Serbia President Tomislav Nikolić Commander-in-Chief Dragan Šutanovac Minister of Defence Lt General Ljubiša Diković Chief of Staff 18 37,000 100,000 EUR 675 million (2011) 2.08% (2011) Abolished in 2011 2,794,948 World Factbook 130,291 (2010) Yugoimport SDPR (Armored vehicles) Utva (Aviation Industry) Fabrika automobila Priboj (Specialized vehicles) Zastava Arms (Small arms) Prvi Partizan (Ammunition manufacturer) Military history of Serbia Military ranks of Serbia ] The Serbian Armed Forces ( [ Bojcka Србије / Vojska Srbije ] ) are the armed services of Serbia. They consist of the Serbian Army (includes River Flotilla on the Danube ) and the Serbian Air Force and Air Defence. The armed forces are entirely professional and volunteer based. [ History ] [ Military history of Serbia ] The first military formation in Serbia dates over 1,500 years ago when Vlastimir of Serbia formed the first medieval Serbian state of Raška in the seventh century. Over the following centuries it would evolve into the Serbian Empire, one of the largest states in Europe at the time. Moravian Serbia was governed by Stefan Lazarević who introduced modern military tactics and firearms to his army however the new technology failed to defeat the superior numbers of the Ottoman Empire. The Ottomans had suppressed the formation of a Serbian state along with its military from 1540 until 1804, the year of the first Serbian uprising. The 1804 Serbian Revolution, started with a Serbian rebellion against the Ottoman occupation of Serbia. The victories in the battles of Ivankovac, Misar, Deligrad and Belgrade, led to the establishment of the Principality of Serbia in 1817. The subsequent Second Serbian Revolution led to full recognition of Serbian independence, establishment of the Kingdom of Serbia and weakened the Ottoman dominance in the Balkans. In 1885 the Serbian army was defeated by the smaller and and worse armed Bulgarian army in the Serb-Bulgarian War. Serbia&apos;s independence and growing influence threatened neighboring Austria-Hungary which lead to the Bosnian crisis of 1908-1909. Consequently, since 1901, all Serbian males between the ages of 21 to 46 were liable for general mobilization. { Serbian Army in WWI } In 1914, Austria-Hungary declared war on Serbia, following the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria, marking the start of the First World War. Serbia repelled 3 consecutive invasions by Austria, winning the first major victories of the war for the Allies, but was eventually overwhelmed by the combined forces of the Central Powers. [ Armed neutrality ] Serbia follows the doctrine of armed neutrality, but does take part in some United Nations peacekeeping missions. This military doctrine is similar to that of Sweden. The neutrality doctrine has obligated Serbia to remain militarily neutral during peacetime or in the event of a war. By its constitution, Serbia must not enter a war as an aggressor on a sovereign state or a defender of another country. The use of its military is limited to an attack on Serbia&apos;s sovereignty. Serbia also practices the doctrine of civilian control of the military, vesting responsibility of the military in the citizens. Serbia does not maintain a military presence in the disputed territory of Kosovo. United Nations Resolution 1244 gives UNMIK temporary administrative control of Kosovo from Serbia. The province declared independence and has formed, with military and financial donations from Slovenia, Germany and the United States, a security force consisting of 2,500 lightly armed members. Serbia sees this formation as &quot; destabilizing to the region &quot; yet it doesn&apos;t see it as a serious threat to its security. [ Organization ] The Serbian General Staff is composed of the highest ranking officers who form the basic strategic command. The current Chief of Staff is Lieutenant General Ljubiša Diković. Tactical and operational command is separated into the three branches, consisting of the Army, Air Force and Air Defense, and the Training Command. Serbia abolished conscription on January 1, 2011. [ Budget and Arms Exports ] Serbia&apos;s current defence spending stands at 2.08% of the GDP, { Defense Ministry press conference } this represents a drop in overall relation to the GDP as a percentage. Over 30% of the budget is spent on pensions alone. { Serbia&apos;s defence budget - Janes.com } The continuing drive to modernize the military will add onto costs in the future. To promote efficient use of funds, the Strategic Defense Review has helped eliminate redundant services, withdrawal of outdated equipment, increase maneuverability and decrease response time. The number of active personnel has been significantly reduced from pre-2004 levels. As of 2011, over 90% of the armed forces are composed of professional soldiers and volunteers. { Sentinel Security Assessment }. Serbia is the largest exporter and producer of military hardware in the region, Serbian exports were 500 million U.S. dollars alone in 2009. { Bloomberg - Serbian exports } [ Peacekeeping ] The Serbian Armed Forces currently take part in five United Nations peacekeeping missions. { Current UN missions } The Serbian Medical Corps has participated in the Congo since March 2003. { Arsenal - (in Serbian) } [ Côte d&apos;Ivoire ] [ Cyprus ] [ Democratic Republic of the Congo ] [ Lebanon ] [ Liberia ] Country Current Mission Organization Number of personnel Côte d&apos;Ivoire UNOCI United Nations 3 officers as military observers Cyprus UNFICYP United Nations 1 staff officer, 2 observers and 6 infantry DR Congo MONUC United Nations 2 staff officers, 2 doctors and 4 technicians Lebanon UNIFIL United Nations 5 staff officers Liberia UNMIL United Nations 4 officers as military observers [ See also ] Military Intelligence Agency VOA Military Security Agency VBA Equipment of the Serbian Army [ References ] [ External links ] [ Military of Serbia ] Official website Ministry of Defense Official recruitment site Category:Military of Serbia bn:সার্বিয়ার সামরিক বাহিনী bg:Армия на Сърбия cs:Srbská armáda de:Streitkräfte Serbiens es:Fuerzas Armadas de Serbia fr:Forces armées serbes hr:Vojska Srbije it:Vojska Srbije he:צבא סרביה hu:Szerbia hadereje nl:Krijgswezen van Servië ja:セルビア軍 pt:Forças Armadas da Sérvia ru:Вооружённые силы Сербии sl:Vojska Srbije sr:Војска Србије sh:Vojska Srbije uk:Збройні сили Сербії