Miss Sixty, boutique in Via Monte Napoleone. Via Monte Napoleone, also spelt as Via Montenapoleone, is an elegant and expensive street in Milan, Italy, famous for its ready-to-wear fashion and jewelry shops. It is the most important street of the Milan Fashion District known as the Quadrilatero della moda where many well-known fashion designers have their high-end boutiques and stores from Italian designers to all the world famous brands. The most exclusive Italian shoemakers maintain boutiques on this street. In 2002 the Street Association start the project &quot; Media &quot; ( viaMontenapoleone ) including the Radio and the Portal, in order to relaunch the made ​​in Italy and all that is trendy in the world through Milan undisputed capital of fashion. Sponsored by the Department Fashion, Tourism Major Events of the Municipality of Milan, Italy Fashion System, Assomoda, today is the first instrument of revival and information on Made in Italy worldwide. Via Montenapoleone is also regarded as one of the most important &apos;streets in fashion&apos;, as Milan is recognized as one of the major fashion capitals in the world. Today, several of the world&apos;s top fashion houses have their headquarters, major offices or large emporia in the street. [ History ] The street traces the Roman city walls erected by Emperor Maximian. In 1783 a financial institution known as the Monte Camerale di Santa Teresa opened here in Palazzo Marliani, with the function of managing the public debt. In 1786 the street itself was named after the monte. { For a monte as a financial institution, cf. } { Monte di Pietà. } The bank was closed in 1796 but re-opened in 1804, when Milan was capital of the Napoleonic Italian Republic, as the Monte Napoleone: from this the street derived its current name. During the first part of the nineteenth century the street was almost entirely rebuilt in the Neoclassical manner with palaces inhabited by the highest of the aristocracy. Notable buildings from this period are the Palazzo Melzi di Cusano, the Palazzo Gavazzi, the Casa Carcassola, and the Palazzetta Tarverna. The much earlier Palazzo Marliani however, regarded as one of the finest houses to survive from the era of the Sforza, was preserved until its destruction during the Allied bombing campaign of 1943. After World War II, Via Monte Napoleone became one of the leading streets in international fashion, somewhat equivalent to Paris &apos; Rue du Faubourg-Saint-Honoré, Rome &apos;s Via Condotti, London &apos;s Bond Street or Oxford Street, and Florence &apos;s Via de&apos; Tornabuoni. Caffè Cova, founded in 1817 and one of the city’s oldest café s and confectioners, relocated to Via Monte Napoleone in 1950 from its original premisses next to the Teatro alla Scala. [ 4 ] A. Testoni Alberta Ferretti Alberto Guardiani Alexander Mcqueen Alfieri &amp; Saint John Alviero Martini Angelo Fusco Aprica Armani Collezioni Armani Junior Ars Rosa Aspesi Atelier Aimée Audemars Piguet Baldinini Bally Bottega Veneta Etro Fabi Fedeli Red and Blue Francesco Biasia Fratelli Rossetti Frette G.Lorenzi Gallia &amp; Peter Gastone Lucioli Gavello Geox Gianmaria Buccellati http://www.buccellati.com Gianni Accardi Giorgetti Space Giuseppe Zanotti Gucci Hogan Iceberg La Murrina La Perla Larusmiani Lorenz Loro Piana Louis Vuitton Mancadori Marano Mariano Rubinacci Mariella Burani Mario Bucellati Marni Mastro Raphael Malegari e Costa Miss Sixty Miu Miu Montblanc Mortarotti Nara Camicie Narciso Rodriguez Nella Longari Omega Paul &amp; Shark Pederzani Philosophy by Alberta Ferretti Pianegonda Pisa Prada Men Prada Women Pucci Ralph Lauren Rocca Calderoni Sabbadini Salvatore Ferragamo Men Salvatore Ferragamo Women Sarli Couture Sebastiani Sergio Rossi Silvano Lattanzi Simonetta Ravizza Spreafico Swatch Tanino Crisci Valentino Man Valentino Woman Venini Versace Vetrerie di Empoli Vierre Yves Saint Laurent List of brands in Montenapoleone [ Gallery ] A beggar in via Montenapoleone, 2007 Delicatessen in Via Montenapoleone Gucci Shop, Via Montenapoleone Elegant shoes in a Via Montenapoleone boutique An arcaded boutique in Via Montenapoleone A portico in Via Montenapoleone The Caffè Cova delicatessen serving traditional Milanese cakes and desserts in Via Montenapoleone Designer shoes in one of the street&apos;s many shops [ See also ] List of upscale shopping districts [ Via Monte Napoleone (Milan) ] [ 45.46826 9.19520 title ] [ References ] [ Alberto Trivulzio, ‘Via Monte Napoleone, perché si chiama cosi?’, Corriere della Sera, 5 October 1994, p. 47. Davide Gorni, ‘Montenapoleone, la guerra degli sfratti milionari’, Corriere della Sera, 23 June 2003, p. 49. Vittore Buzzi and Claudio Buzzi, &apos;&apos;Le vie di Milano: dizionario della toponomastica milanese&apos;&apos; (Milan: Hoepli Editore, 2005), p. 270 &apos;&apos;Milano&apos;&apos;, Guida d&apos;Italia del Touring club italiano, 10th edn (Milan: Touring Editore, 1998), p. 292. ‘The old Cova Café in the history of Milan’, pasticceriacova.com. ] Category:Jewellery districts Category:Milan culture Category:Visitor attractions in Milan Category:Shopping districts and streets in Italy Category:Streets in Milan es:Vía Montenapoleone eo:Via Montenapoleone id:Via Montenapoleone it:Via Monte Napoleone ru:Виа Монтенаполеоне sk:Via Montenapoleone zh-yue:拿破侖山道 zh:蒙特拿破仑大街