[ yes 1990 ] { Trotskyism } { Left-wing to } { Far-left } { Red } { People&apos;s National Assembly } [ February 2011 ] [ February 2011 ] The Workers&apos; Party ( [ Parti des Travailleurs ], Arabic Hizb al-Ummal حزب العمال) is a Trotskyist political party in Algeria, closely linked with the Workers&apos; Party of France. The party is led by Louisa Hanoune. The Workers&apos; Party, PT abbreviation, is a left-wing party, advocating for the protection and promotion of trade union movements in Algeria, from its claims, including a figure egalitarian doctrine is to claim that a better distribution of wealth on the people of country. The creation of this party back to the year 1990, one year after the constitutional reform which introduced a multiparty system, its Secretary General Louisa Hanoune, who in 2004 was the first woman in the Arab world to stand as a candidate for a presidential election. The Workers&apos; Party received 3.3 percent of the vote and elected 21 members to parliament in the 2002 legislative elections. In the 2004 presidential elections, Hanoune was the first woman in Algeria to run for the office. She received 101,630 votes (1 percent). In the 2007 parliamentary elections it was the biggest opposition party, winning 5.08% of the vote and 26 seats out of 389. The three party coalition ( National Liberation Front (FLN), National Rally for Democracy (RND) and Movement of Society for Peace ) won 249 of the 389. Turnout was just 35% In the 2007 regional and municipal elections, it won in over 1,000 elections winning 6.5% of the vote. [ History ] The Workers&apos; Party was founded in 1990 by workers, trade unionists, peasants and youth at the initiative of the Socialist Workers Organization, on a platform of class struggle deriving from what it sees as the major contradiction between the interests of workers and &quot; exploited classes &quot;, and &quot; oppressed &quot; and those of owners, &quot; exploiters &quot; and &quot; oppressors &quot;. Louisa Hanoune has been its president since its inception. The PT aims to provide workers with independent political representation. The Workers&apos; Party claims continuity with the Algerian national movement, in particular the North African Star and the Algerian People&apos;s Party. It is at odds with what it sees as &quot; imperialism &quot; embodied in the activities of the International Monetary Fund, the World Trade Organization, the World Bank, the European Union, the New Partnership for Africa&apos;s Development (NEPAD), etc. Part of the labor movement internationally, the Workers&apos; Party wishes to achieve socialism. [ The PT ] In this context, the PT campaigns for the cancellation of external debt, the defense of nationalization of land, natural soil and subsoil, businesses and infrastructure (railways, water, electricity, ports, airports, cultural and artistic heritage, telecommunications, air and sea). It fights for the preservation of public enterprises and social achievements of national independence against privatisation, for the renationalisation of public services and enterprises privatised, and the reopening of those that have been closed. It campaigns for the right to free public education, compulsory until the age of 16, and against private education. It campaigns for the prohibition of child labour, the right to public health, against the privatization of the health sector and for the right to housing. It campaigns for a national development plan based around public works, funded by public investment and genuine agrarian reform (decreed land distribution fellahs exclusively) to those who work and who live together, so that they can benefit from free assistance from the State (seed, equipment, fertilizer, forage, etc.). It fights against all laws and agreements that call into question the unity of the republic, or any national or social legislation that threatens national industrial production and agriculture. At the centre of its political action, the Workers&apos; Party defends the one and indivisible Republic against, regionalization, the promotion of &apos;local peculiarities&apos;, and against the &apos;zones&apos;. It is against the reform of state structures and missions enshrined in the Republic. [ PT Ideology ] The Workers&apos; Party plans to fight the international financial institutions to integrate trade unions, to dissolve in &quot; civil society &quot;, &quot; social forums &quot; through &quot; participatory democracy, &quot; to bribe them for ongeisant destroy. He fights for: The independence of trade unions in respect of the State of any religious group, political pressure or financial international institutions. It unconditionally fight for the preservation of the UGTA as national representation of workers indicate their unity, cement the unity of the nation. It seeks at all times to help workers take their union to defend their claims and tear. [ The battle for PT ] The Workers&apos; Party fighting for democracy, which involves the election of a Constituent Assembly by direct universal suffrage and secret ballot with proportional integral, which is verifiable and revocable. An assembly which identifies a responsible government before the representative of the majority achieving its democratic and social aspirations, such a meeting with all powers alone is empowered to draft a constitution or change in accordance with the aspirations and popular democracy. She is the guarantor of national sovereignty. In the immediate future the Workers&apos; Party work for the restoration of peace by: The release of all political prisoners. The resolution of the issue of missing persons. The right to political organization, and for all and for all. The restoration of all democratic freedoms, lifting the state of emergency and all the emergency measures, the prohibition of punishment for crimes of opinion, the press or the exercise of trade union activity. Respect for the multiparty system. The equal rights between women and men that entails the repeal of the Family Code and the enactment of civil laws, equal devoting full citizenship for women, The recognition of Tamazight as an official language, and that its status as a national language to become effective by the spread of its teaching in public schools at the national level of mandatory and its use in the institutions of the republic, care of its promotion by the state budget. [ On the social level ] The Workers&apos; Party is campaigning for: The right to a permanent work for all those who live. The sliding scale of wages and pensions, indexation on the cost of living. The preservation of the social security system and retirement pay, against the pension fund. The right to collective bargaining, collective agreements, national statutes. The preservation of nature and unified public service positions, the defense of the current code, against contracting and downloading. Prohibition of any wages below the minimum wage. The ratification of all ILO Conventions, which spend, conquests workers. The establishment of a minimum income for first job seekers and unemployment compensation for laid-off workers until they are hired. [ At the international level ] The Workers&apos; Party is internationalist. Part of the Entente Internationale des Travailleurs, it supports and is in all initiatives and campaigns against the war in defense of nations, organizations of workers and democratic freedoms, against repression, privatization, and deregulation, in defense of the ILO conventions, all conquests workers.The Workers&apos; Party supports the right of the Palestinian people to the nation, sovereignty, to a republic of secular and democratic Palestine, in all territories of Palestine, guaranteeing equality between all citizens regardless of their origin, or religion and the return of all refugees since 1948.He undertook to work towards preserving the integrity of the nations of the Maghreb, for peace and brotherhood among peoples renewing the North African Star.It reiterates its determination to combat all imperialist wars and occupation, the looting of the wealth of nations, for the integrity of nations, against any foreign interference, the right of peoples to self-determination, to define the form and content of the institutions they need to decide their fate. In this context, it calls for the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of occupying forces from Iraq and is committed to contribute to any initiative and democratic international workers participating in this goal.It takes the struggle in coordination with the African activists and organizations for the preservation of the African continent for the disappearance programmed by wars and conflicts that generate the political looting of the wealth of nations by the repayment of external debt and Plans Structural Adjustment.It reiterates its determination to combine efforts with those of all those working independently around the world to safeguard the achievements of human civilization and thus rid mankind of the world system in place that threatens the finally plunge into barbarism and chaos.The Workers&apos; Party is campaigning for a world of peace and freedom and fraternal cooperation among peoples and nations, so that science is for progress and human civilization.This is the contents of the coming socialism which advocates the Workers&apos; Party, and it reflects in its political practice. [ Objectives of the PT ] To achieve its objectives, the Workers Party is using all the instruments of democracy, political action and association, to organize the workers and popular mobilization, unity of action on specific issues with parties and unions.When participating in elections, it uses the parliament on the basis of democracy mandate involving compliance and the rules which fix. [ External links ] Official site PT Unofficial web site Category:Communist parties in Algeria Category:Political parties in Algeria Category:Trotskyist organisations ar:حزب العمال الجزائري ca:Partit dels Treballadors (Algèria) de:Arbeiterpartei (Algerien) fr:Parti des travailleurs (Algérie) ja:労働者党 (アルジェリア) pl:Partia Robotników pt:Partido dos Trabalhadores (Argélia)