[ December 2009 ] Events from the year 1974 in Canada. [ Incumbents ] Monarch - Elizabeth II Governor General - Roland Michener then Jules Léger Prime Minister - Pierre Trudeau Premier of Alberta - Peter Lougheed Premier of British Columbia - David Barrett Premier of Manitoba - Edward Schreyer Premier of New Brunswick - Richard Hatfield Premier of Newfoundland - Frank Moores Premier of Nova Scotia - Gerald Regan Premier of Ontario - Bill Davis Premier of Prince Edward Island - Alexander B. Campbell Premier of Quebec - Robert Bourassa Premier of Saskatchewan - Allan Blakeney [ Events ] January 1 - The Canadian Stock Exchange merges with the Montreal Stock Exchange January 7 - Bora Laskin sworn in as Chief Justice of Canada January 14 - Jules Léger is sworn in as Governor General January 26 - The Global Television network begins broadcasting May 23 - New Brunswick becomes the first province to be officially bilingual June 29 - Soviet ballet dancer Mikhail Baryshnikov defects in Toronto July 2 - Ralph Steinhauer becomes the first Aboriginal person to be a Canadian Lieutenant Governor when he is appointed Lieutenant Governor of Alberta July 3 - Canada first demands that its territorial waters be extended to 200 nautical miles (370.4  km) vote of no-confidence in parliament forces election July 8 - Federal election : Pierre Trudeau &apos;s Liberals win a majority July 31 - Bill 22 is passed making French the official language of government and business in Quebec August 1 - The Elections Act is passed limiting campaign contributions August 9 - Nine Canadians are killed when their plane is shot down by Syria September 17 - The RCMP decides to allow female members for the first time November 29 - An aircraft is hijacked over Saskatchewan. It is recovered in Saskatoon [ Full date unknown ] Paul Martin made president of Canada Steamship Lines The Waffle disbands The report of the Le Dain Commission argues marijuana should be decriminalized Robert Cliche chairs a Royal Commission investigating corruption in Quebec&apos;s construction industry. Brian Mulroney, later to become Prime Minister, first comes to national attention as a panelist on the commission. [ Arts and literature ] [ New works ] Bill Bissett - Living with the vishyun Irving Layton - The Pole-Vaulter Margaret Atwood - You Are Happy Alice Munro - Something I&apos;ve Been Meaning to Tell You Margaret Laurence - The Diviners [ Awards ] See 1974 Governor General&apos;s Awards for a complete list of winners and finalists for those awards. Stephen Leacock Award : Donald Jack, That&apos;s Me in the Middle Vicky Metcalf Award : Jean Little [ Births ] Robert Ghiz [ January to March ] January 14 - Hugues Legault, swimmer January 19 - Diane Cummins, middle distance runner January 21 - Robert Ghiz, politician and 31st Premier of Prince Edward Island January 23 - Joel Bouchard, ice hockey player February 6 - Layne Roland, ice hockey player February 7 - Steve Nash, basketball player [ April to June ] April 11 - Tricia Helfer, model and actress April 26 - Jacinthe Pineau, swimmer May 10 - Jon Beare, rower and Olympic bronze medalist May 16 - Yannick Keith Lizé, water polo player and scientist May 18 - Chantal Kreviazuk, singer-songwriter May 18 - Carolyn Russell, squash player June 1 - Alanis Morissette, singer-songwriter, record producer and actress June 6 - Anson Carter, ice hockey player June 9 - Jackie Lance, softball player [ July to September ] July 6 - Steve Sullivan, ice hockey player July 7 - Patrick Lalime, ice hockey player July 13 - Deborah Cox, singer-songwriter and actress August 9 - Mara Jones, rower August 15 - Natasha Henstridge, actress and model September 8 - Becky Price, field hockey player September 18 - Nicole Haynes, heptathlete September 28 - Alison Parrott, murder victim (d. 1986 ) [ October to December ] October 6 - Madonna Gimotea, rhythmic gymnast October 10 - Chris Pronger, ice hockey player October 11 - Jason Arnott, ice hockey player October 16 - Paul Kariya, ice hockey player October 22 - Paul Duerden, volleyball player November 4 - Amy MacFarlane, field hockey player November 21 - Casey Patton, boxer November 25 - David Cadieux, boxer [ Deaths ] February 21 - Tim Horton, ice hockey player and businessman (b. 1930 ) April 2 - Douglass Dumbrille, actor (b. 1889 ) April 5 - A. Y. Jackson, painter, one of the Group of Seven (b. 1882 ) April 8 - James Charles McGuigan, Cardinal (b. 1894 ) August 25 - Major James Coldwell, politician (b. 1888 ) Category:Years of the 20th century in Canada Canada fr:1974 au Canada