The earliest scientific manuscripts originated in the Abbasid Era. The House of Wisdom ( [ بيت الحكمة ]; Bayt Ul-Hikma) was a library and translation institute established in Abbassid -era Baghdad, Iraq. { Iraq: The &apos;Abbasid Caliphate, } { Encyclopædia Britannica } It was a key institution in the Translation Movement and considered to have been a major intellectual centre during the Islamic Golden Age. The House of Wisdom was a society founded by Caliph Harun al-Rashid and culminating under his son al-Ma&apos;mun, who reigned from 813–833 AD and is credited with its institution. Al-Ma&apos;mun is also credited with bringing many well-known scholars to share information ideas and culture in the House of Wisdom. Based in Baghdad from the 9th to 13th centuries, many of the most learned Muslim scholars were part of this excellent research and educational institute.It had the dual purpose of translating books from Middle Persian to Arabic and also of the preservation of translated books. { Josef W. Meri, Jere L. Bacharach, Medieval Islamic Civilization: An Encyclopedia, Published by Routledge, 2006, ISBN 0-415-96690-6, p. 451. } During the reign of al-Ma&apos;mun, observatories were set up, and the House was an unrivalled center for the study of humanities and for science in medieval Islam, including mathematics, astronomy, medicine, alchemy and chemistry, zoology and geography and cartography. Drawing on Persian, Indian and Greek texts—including those of Pythagoras, Plato, Aristotle, Hippocrates, Euclid, Plotinus, Galen, Sushruta, Charaka, Aryabhata and Brahmagupta —the scholars accumulated a great collection of world knowledge, and built on it through their own discoveries. Baghdad was known as the world&apos;s richest city and centre for intellectual development of the time, and had a population of over one million, the largest in its time. { George Modelski, World Cities: –3000 to 2000, Washington DC: FAROS 2000, 2003. ISBN 2-00309-499-4. See also Evolutionary World Politics Homepage. } [ History ] [ Foundation and origins ] { Physician learning a complex surgical method. } In the Abbasid Empire, many foreign works were translated into Arabic from Greek, Chinese and many other languages like Sanskrit. Large libraries were constructed, and scholars persecuted by the Byzantine Empires were welcomed. { Wiet. Baghdad } Works were also translated at the Academy of Gundishapur, during the Muslim conquest of Persia. In 750, the Abbasid dynasty replaced the Umayyad as the ruling dynasty of the Islamic empire, and in 762, the caliph al-Mansur (reigned 754 – 775) built Baghdad and made it his capital (the previous capital having been Damascus ). The Abbasid dynasty had a strong Persian bent, and adopted many practices from the Sassanid empire – among those, that of translating foreign works, except that now works were translated into Arabic. For this purpose, al-Mansur founded a palace library, modeled after the Sassanid Imperial Library. The concept of the library catalog was introduced in the House of Wisdom and other medieval Islamic libraries, where books were organized into specific genres and categories. [ Micheau Francoise The Scientific Institutions in the Medieval Near East 988–991 ] { in } [ Morelon Rashed 1996 985–1007 ] In this academy, translators, scientists, scribes, authors, men of letters, writers, authors, copyists and others used to meet every day for the purposes of translation, reading, writing, scribing, discourse, dialogue and discussion. Many manuscripts and books in various scientific subjects, and in different languages were translated in the House of Wisdom. The activities of the library was supported by a large number of stationery shops. These shops doubled as bookshops, the largest of which, al-Nakim, sold thousands of books every day. This industry was only possible because of the abundance of paper (warraqa). [ Under Al-Ma&apos;mun ] Under the sponsorship of caliph al-Ma&apos;mun (reigned 813 – 833), it seems that the House of Wisdom took on new functions related to mathematics and astrology. The focus also shifted from Persian to Greek texts. At that time, the library was directed by the poet and astrologer Sahl ibn Haroun (d. 830); the other notable scholars associated with the library are Muhammad ibn Mūsā al-Khwārizmī (780–850), the Banu Musa brothers ( Mohammed Jafar ibn Musa, Ahmad ibn Musa, and al-Hasan ibn Musa ), Sind ibn Ali and Yaqub ibn Ishaq al-Kindi (801–873). Christian scholar Hunayn ibn Ishaq (809–873) was placed in charge of the translation work by the caliph. The most renowned translator was the Sabian Thābit ibn Qurra (826–901). Translations of this era were superior to earlier ones, however, soon after, the emphasis on translation work declined, as new ideas became more important. [ October 2009 ] The House of Wisdom flourished under al-Ma&apos;mun&apos;s successors al-Mu&apos;tasim (reign 833–842) and al-Wathiq (reign 842 – 847), but declined under the reign of al-Mutawakkil (reign 847–861), mainly because Ma&apos;mun, Mu&apos;tasim, and Wathiq followed the sect of Mu&apos;tazili, while al-Mutawakkil followed orthodox Islam. He wanted to stop the spread of Greek philosophy which was one of the main tools in Mu&apos;tazili theology. [ May 2012 ] The House of Wisdom eventually acquired a reputation as a center of learning, although universities as we know them did not yet exist at this time — transmission of knowledge was done directly from teacher to student, without any institutional surrounding. Maktab s soon began to develop in the city from the 9th century, and in the 11th century, Nizam al-Mulk founded the Al-Nizamiyya of Baghdad. [ Destruction by the Mongols ] Along with all other libraries in Baghdad, the House of Wisdom was destroyed during the Mongol invasion of Baghdad in 1258. About 400,000 manuscripts were rescued by al-Tusi before the siege { George Saliba, &apos; Islamic science and the making of the European Renaissance &apos;, p.243 }, which he took to Maragheh. [ Other houses of wisdom ] Some other places have also been called House of Wisdom: [ May 2012 ] In Cairo, Dar al-Hikmah, the &quot; House of Wisdom &quot;, was another name of the House of Knowledge, founded by the Fatimid Caliph Al-Hakim bi-Amr Allah in 1004. [ 33.3423 N 44.3836 E scale:1250 ] There is a research institute in Baghdad called Bayt al-Hikma after the Abbasid-era research center. While the complex includes a 13th century madrasa, it is not the same building as the medieval Bayt al-Hikma. It was damaged during the 2003 invasion of Iraq The main library at Hamdard University in Karachi, Pakistan is called &apos;Bait al Hikmah&apos;. It is the largest library in Pakistan. Bait al hikmat [ See also ] Round city of Baghdad Brethren of Purity Dar Al-Hekma Dar Al-Hekma College [ Notes ] [ References ] [ Morelon Régis Rashed Roshdi 1996 Encyclopedia of the History of Arabic Science 3 Routledge 0415124107 ] Encyclopedia of the History of Arabic Science (limited on-line access) [ External links ] [ October 2009 ] Centuries in the House of Wisdom in The Guardian – overall history with particular focus on the House of Wisdom Legacy of the Islamic Golden Age, with details on the House of Wisdom Pictures of the modern Bayt al-Hikma and the damage it took during the 2003 invasion of Iraq. Iraq Manuscript Collections, Archives, – Libraries Situation Report, includes a description of the modern Bayt al-Hikma and its looting. Jeff Oaks: The scholarly milieu of Abu&apos;l-Wafa, with references to the House of Wisdom Was al-Khwarizmi an applied algebraist? – with discussion of the role of House of Wisdom (references George Makdisi and Dimitri Gutas ) Translation Movements in Iran; Sassanian Era to Year 2000, Expansion, Preservation and Modernization The Transmission of Knowledge – A case study: the Arab acquisition of Greek science. Category:9th-century establishments Category:Buildings and structures in Baghdad Category:Defunct libraries Category:History of Iraq Category:Educational institutions established in the 8th century Category:History of Islamic science Category:Arabic architecture Category:Libraries in Iraq Category:Destroyed landmarks Category:Harun al-Rashid ar:بيت الحكمة az:Hikmətlər evi de:Haus der Weisheit el:Οίκος της Σοφίας es:Casa de la sabiduría fa:بیت‌الحکمه fr:Maison de la sagesse gl:Casa da Sabedoría ko:지혜의 집 it:Bayt al-Hikma he:בית החוכמה ms:Baitul Hikmah nl:Huis der Wijsheid ja:知恵の館 uz:Bayt al-Hikma pt:Casa da Sabedoria ru:Дом Мудрости sk:Dom múdrosti fi:Viisauden talo sv:Visdomens hus ur:بیت الحکمت zh:智慧之家