[ 300px Castor and Pollux fighting at the Battle of Lake Regillus, 1880 illustration by John Reinhard Weguelin to the Lays of Ancient Rome by Thomas Macaulay Battle of Lake Regillus the Roman-Latin wars c. 496 BC near Frascati ( Rome ) Roman victory Roman Republic Latin League Aulus Postumius Albus, Titus Aebutius Elva (master of the horse) Octavius Mamilius, Tarquinius Superbus ] An engraving of Lake Regillus, where the battle took place. { Monte Porzio Catone } [ Lays of Ancient Rome/The Battle of the Lake Regillus Macaulay&apos;s The Battle of the Lake Regillus ] The Battle of Lake Regillus was a legendary early Roman victory, won over the Latin League led by the expelled Etruscan former king of Rome. { Grant, The History of Rome, p. 37 } It is usually said to have occurred in 498 BC, { Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology, } { William Smith, Editor } but other dates have been proposed, including 499 BC, { Cornell, The Beginnings of Rome, p216 } 496 BC and 493 BC. The battle may be entirely legendary, due to the scarcity of records from this early date in Roman history. According to Livy the fight was waged against the Latins, with help from Tarquinius Superbus, the former Etruscan king of Rome. Lake Regillus, the relic of a volcanic crater, was dried in the 4th century BC: it was located not far from Frascati and the ruins of Tusculum, in Prataporci site, east to Rome (some 20  km from the Servian Wall of Rome). Aulus Postumius Albus was dictator for the year and Titus Aebutius Elva was master of the horse. Octavius Mamilius, Tarquinius, and his son Sextus led the Latins; the presence of the Tarquinii caused the Romans to fight more passionately than in any previous battle. Tarquinius was injured at the beginning of the battle when he attacked Postumius; Aebutius meanwhile attacked Mamilius, but was injured in the arm, while Mamilius suffered a minor wound to the chest. Tarquinius&apos; troops, made up of exiled Romans, began to push the Romans back, and Marcus Valerius Volusus ( consul 505 BC ) was killed by a spear when he tried to attack Sextus. Postumius then brought fresh troops from his own bodyguard into the battle. Mamilius was killed in the ensuing fight by Titus Herminius, who was subsequently killed by a javelin. Postumius ordered the equites to dismount and attack on foot, and soon the Latins were forced to retreat. The Latin camp was also captured. Postumius and Aebutius returned to Rome in triumph. { Livy, } { From the Founding of the City 2.19 } A popular Roman legend had the Dioscuri (Castor and Pollux) helping in the victory, transfigured as two young horsemen, and Postumius ordered a temple built to them in the Roman Forum, in the place in which they were watering their horses. In the 19th century it was celebrated in the Lays of Ancient Rome by Thomas Macaulay. [ References ] [ Sources ] Primary sources [ From the Founding of the City Livy trans. Canon Roberts 1905 ] (print: Book 1 as The Rise of Rome, Oxford University Press, 1998, ISBN 0-19-282296-9) Secondary sources [ Michael Grant (author) Grant Michael The History of Rome Faber and Faber 1993 0-571-11461-X ] Livy : Ab Urbe Condita Book II cap. 19; 20. Ab Urbe Condita (Latin) &apos;&apos;The Battle of Lake Regillus&apos;&apos; poem from Macaulay&apos;s &quot; Lays of Ancient Rome &quot;. Cornell, Tim, The Beginnings of Rome: Italy and Rome from the Bronze Age to the Punic Wars, C.1000-263 BC, Routledge, 1995. ISBN 0-415-01596-0. [ Italy ] Category:5th-century BC conflicts Lake Regillus Category:500s BC Category:490s BC bg:Битка при Регилското езеро ca:Batalla del Llac Regillus de:Regillus lacus es:Batalla del Lago Regilo fr:Bataille du lac Régille it:Battaglia del Lago Regillo he:קרב רגילוס ka:რეგილის ტბასთან ბრძოლა nl:Slag bij het meer van Regillus ja:レギッルス湖畔の戦い pl:Bitwa nad jeziorem Regillus pt:Batalha do Lago Regillus ro:Bătălia de lângă lacul Regillus sk:Bitka pri jazere Regillus sv:Regillus