[ January 2010 ] A typical street on Balboa Island. Balboa Island is an area of Newport Beach, California, actually comprising three modified or artificial island s in Newport Harbor: Balboa Island ( [ 33 36 23 N 117 53 40 W ] ), the largest; the smaller Little Balboa Island ( [ 33 36 23 N 117 53 16 W ] ) to the east of Balboa Island, joined by a two-lane bridge; and the smallest Collins Island ( [ 33 36 31 N 117 54 1 W ] ) to the northwest of Balboa Island, joined by a one-lane bridge. The Balboa Island community is joined to the mainland by a short two-lane bridge on the northeast of Balboa Island, and a privately-operated fleet of three, three-car ferry boats ( Balboa Island Ferry ) which provide access across the harbor to the Balboa Peninsula which lies to the south. [ History ] Balboa Island, 1921. The island (formerly known as Balisle) was not always easily accessible. Newport Harbor was still largely undredged, and sailboat was often the only way to get around. Robert McFadden, an early Balboa Harbor developer had established a successful fishing wharf on the Balboa Peninsula and by 1906, the Pacific Electric line Red Cars began servicing the Balboa Peninsula and Balboa Pavilion, and soon the Red Cars brought thousands of visitors from Los Angeles. { Balboa Island Improvement Association, History of Balboa Island, http://www.balboa-island.org/h.htm, 2007. } In the late 1860s, the bay was used as a landing to load hides, tallow, hay and other goods for export. In September 1870, Captain Samuel S. Dunnells’ steamer Vaquero ventured into the bay to offload a cargo of lumber and shingles. Captain Dunnells soon established “Newport Landing” by constructing a small wharf and warehouse near the west end of the present Coast Highway/Newport Bay Bridge. { Balboa Island Visitor&apos;s Guide, http://www.balboa-island.net, 2007. } James McFadden and his younger brother Robert acquired the landing in 1875 and for the next 19 years operated a thriving commercial trade and shipping business. However, the bay was not yet a true harbor and sand bars and a treacherous bay entrance caused the McFadden brothers to move the shipping business to the oceanfront by constructing a large pier on the sand spit that would become the Balboa Peninsula. The site was ideal because a submarine canyon (Newport Submarine Canyon - a favorite breeding ground for the Great White Shark ), carved along with Newport Bay by the ancient Santa Ana River, provided calm waters close to the shore. McFadden Wharf was completed in 1888 and was connected by rail to Santa Ana in 1891. For the next eight years, the McFadden Wharf area was a booming commercial and shipping center and a company town began to grow. However, in 1899, the Federal Government allocated funds for major improvements to a new harbor at San Pedro, which would become Southern California’s major seaport. The McFadden Wharf and railroad was sold to the Southern Pacific Railroad that same year, signaling the end of Newport Bay as a commercial shipping center. In 1902, James McFadden sold his Newport townsite and about half the Peninsula to William S. Collins, who saw Newport Bay’s resort and recreation potential. Collins took on Henry E. Huntington as a partner in the Newport Beach Company. Huntington had acquired the Pacific Electric railway system and used it to promote new communities outside of Los Angeles. In 1905, the Pacific Electric “ Red Cars ” were extended to Newport. Collins began dredging a channel on the north side of the bay and deposited the sand and silt on tidelands that would become Balboa Island. Between 1902 and 1907, many of Newport Beaches’ waterfront communities were subdivided, including West Newport, East Newport, Bay Island, Balboa, and Balboa Island. This established the grid system of small lots and narrow streets and alleys that still exists today. Within a few years, real estate promoters began sending salesmen to Pasadena and to Los Angeles (both connected by the Red Cars) to promote property in and around Newport Harbor. Much Balboa Island property was sold in Pasadena, one of the reasons that many longtime Island residents have family and contacts in the Pasadena area. One of these real estate promoters was William Collins. At the time, Balboa Island was little more than a sandbar usually swallowed up by high tide. In 1908 and 1909, with permission of the Orange County Board of Supervisors, Collins moved his small dredge to the eastern part of the Newport bay, a mud flat called &quot; Snipe Island, &quot; and begin cutting a channel along the north side of the bay across from the Pavilion, piling the sand and silt up on the mud flat and thus Balboa Island was born. At this time, an advertising campaign was offering waterfront lots for $350.00 to $750.00. However, despite the advertisements, Collins originally sold lots on the Island for as little as $25.00, with promises that all streets, sewers and street lights would soon be installed and a bridge and ferry service to follow. Construction was begun for the ferry landing. Streets were staked out and lots were mapped. Even a few narrow sidewalks were built. A low [ 14 in mm on ] wooden bulkhead was built along the south side of the island and an impromptu sewer system was laid out with pipes draining onto the beaches at their low tide levels to keep the discharge out of sight. The island grew slowly at first, but in 1916, it became part of the City of Newport Beach. In 1918 the Balboa Island Improvement Association was started (and is still going strong). The BIIA was a strong motivating force in working with the City on bulkhead repair, ferry service, a sewer system, water, gas, electricity, paved streets and sidewalks, and street lighting. In those early days (1919), water for the Island came from the famous &quot; Wooden Water Tower &quot; built on Agate St. (removed in 1929). In 1920, Park Avenue was the only paved road on the Island. People had outhouses behind their houses as there was no sewer, and some buried their trash in vacant lots. In 1920, a gas utility came to the Island providing heating, cooking, and lights. Joseph Allan Beek, while still a student at Pasadena City College, was enchanted with the area, and became one of Collins&apos; salesmen. Joe Beek played a crucial role in the development of Balboa Island, and spent a lifetime devoted to it. In 1919, Joe got the first contract for a ferry between the Island and Balboa Peninsula. In 1920, the first car was pushed across the bay (for 10 cents). In 1922, Joe Beek got a 15-year franchise, using the ferry boat &quot; Joker &quot;, which could hold two cars. That franchise has continued to this day, with three [ 64 ft m on ] boats, named &quot; Admiral, &quot; &quot; Captain, &quot; and &quot; Commodore, &quot; that can each carry three vehicles. Beek later became Secretary of the California State Senate, where he served until his death in 1968. By 1921, homes were beginning to fill in the Island and Balboa Peninsula. Roads to the Newport Harbor area were still largely undeveloped, and many people still arrived by rail to the peninsula and took the ferry over to the island. Although the first bridge from the mainland to the island&apos;s North Bay Front was built in 1912, it was not capable of carrying automobiles until 1929, when it was refurbished. The seawall was rebuilt in 1922.. The Grand Canal wooden bulkhead and walk were rebuilt in concrete in 1929. The present day Bay Front bulkhead, walks and public piers were completed in 1938. In 1924, the narrow bridge to Balboa Island was replaced with two lanes of wood. That bridge existed until 1928, when it was demolished to make way for a concrete bridge. Some of the wood from the old bridge was used to construct the building next to the &quot; Jolly Roger &quot; Restaurant (now Wilma&apos;s) on Marine Avenue. In 1929, a new concrete bridge was built and served for 51 years. The island&apos;s population grew from a little over 100 in 1929 to today&apos;s 4,500 in winter, and close to 10,000 summer renters. In 1981, the existing concrete bridge was replaced with a new, modern concrete structure with 9&apos; wide walks. In 1941 Englishman William Maxwell purchased 15 lots, an investment that he still owns today. [ Jamboree Road ] [ Jamboree Road ] The 1953 National Scout Jamboree of the Boy Scouts of America held its event where Newport Center and Fashion Island are now located. It was the third international jamboree, the first to be held west of the Mississippi River, and had 50,000 scouts from all 50 states and 16 foreign countries. { Orange County - 1946 to 1962 } Thousands of tents were pitched in the area accessible only by a muddy two-lane trail called Palisades Road. The road was soon paved, and later the name was changed to Jamboree Road in honor of the event. It remains a major thoroughfare through Newport Beach, ending at Balboa Island. [ April 2008 ] { Balboa Island Improvement Association, History of Balboa Island, www.balboa-island.org/h.htm, 2007. } [ Balboa Island today ] According to the 2000 US Census, Balboa Island is one of the densest communities in Orange County. Approximately 3,000 residents live on just [ 0.2 sqmi km2 ] giving it a population density of 17,621 person per square mile—higher than that of San Francisco. { 92662 Zip Code (Newport Beach, California) Detailed Profile - residents and real estate info } Despite having some of the country&apos;s most expensive homes, most of the dwellings are on small lots. A lot size on Balboa Island is 35 feet x 85 feet. In 2008 &quot; teardowns &quot; on interior lots of that size were going for $2,000,000. As times change some of the lots are being cobbled together into 1.5 or 2.0 sized lots for larger homes. The perimeter of the island along the Bayfront is dotted with piers for the homeowners&apos; boats. Marine Avenue and Agate Avenue form the commercial spine of the island. Part of the attractiveness of the commercial districts is its &quot; mixed use &quot; or &quot; loft &quot; characteristic where a business has a residence above it. This adds a European flavor to the island and allows the business owner to actually live on the same property, a really &quot; green &quot; alternative in terms of commuting. These residences can be found on both Agate Avenue and Marine Avenue. Balboa Island has developed into a close-knit community, home to professionals, families, retirees, students and celebrities [ April 2008 ]. Balboa Island has several associations. The Balboa Island Improvement Association which is a voluntary group of people who live or work on Balboa Island. The Business Improvement District which is a Merchant sponsored group on Marine Avenue. The Little Balboa Island Association which is a group of home owners only on Little Balboa Island. There is plenty of opportunity for community involvement on Balboa Island. Balboa Island is one of the most expensive real estate markets in North America outside of Lower Manhattan. A two-bedroom house with a water view from the living room can cost about $3 million. [ April 2008 ] Local tradition has it that Balboa Island is where the frozen chocolate banana was first marketed. Snack shops on Marine Avenue will dip a frozen banana on a stick into chocolate sauce and dredge it in ground nuts or candy sprinkles. This legend is referenced in the American television show &apos;&apos;Arrested Development&apos;&apos; in which the wealthy Bluth family of Orange County owns a frozen chocolate banana stand on Balboa Island. Tourists from all over the world come to stay on the island in one of the many vacation rentals, year after year as tradition. They enjoy the summer days at the beach and evenings on the main street having dinner in the many restaurants, after dinner having their Balboa Bars at the ice cream shops and getting bags of saltwater taffy at the old fashioned candy store. { http://www.balboacandy.com/aboutus.html } The ZIP Code for Balboa Island is 92662. [ References ] 7. http://www.balboaisland.com The Balboa Island site. [ See also ] List of islands of California Category:Artificial islands Category:Populated places in Orange County, California Category:Neighborhoods in Newport Beach, California Category:Islands of Newport Beach, California de:Balboa Island es:Isla Balboa it:Balboa Island pt:Balboa Island fi:Balboa Island