[ The Subtle Knife 1998 edition cover Philip Pullman Philip Pullman &amp; David Scutt United Kingdom English His Dark Materials Fantasy novel, Mystery Scholastic Point 1997 Print ( Hardback &amp; Paperback ) 341 pp 0-590-11289-9 44058512 Northern Lights AKA The Golden Compass The Amber Spyglass ] The Subtle Knife, the second novel in the book His Dark Materials series, was written by the English novelist Philip Pullman and published in 1997. The novel continues the adventures of Lyra Belacqua as she investigates the mysterious Dust phenomenon and searches for her father. Will Parry is introduced as a companion to Lyra, and together they explore the new realms to which they have both been introduced. The book focuses more on the characters and their own individual plots, rather than just on Lyra&apos;s father, Lord Asriel, and his war against the Magisterium. It describes not only Lyra and Will&apos;s journey, but also the journeys of Lee Scoresby and Serafina Pekkala. In addition, Pullman alludes heavily to the study of dark matter (or &quot; Dust &quot; ) and particle physics to further establish his metaphysical saga. [ Plot summary ] After twelve-year-old Will Parry accidentally kills a man, he discovers an invisible window that leads to Cittàgazze, a city in another world, in his efforts to escape the police. The city looks recently deserted, and Will chooses a shop to find food. It is here that he meets 12-year-old Lyra Silvertongue and her daemon Pantalaimon, who came here after entering the hole in the sky that her father, Lord Asriel, created at the end of Northern Lights. Meanwhile, the witch Serafina Pekkala, who was separated from Lyra during a battle in Northern Lights, is searching for her. She discovers that the Magisterium and Lyra&apos;s mother, Mrs. Coulter, are learning the prophecy surrounding Lyra by torturing another witch. She kills that witch and leaves to call a meeting of the witches council. The witches vote to band together and join Lyra&apos;s father, Lord Asriel, in his fight against the Magisterium. Scoresby ventures out to find the explorer Stanislaus Grumman, who is rumored to know of an object that gives protection to whoever holds it. Back in Cittàgazze, Will and Lyra become allies; they also discover they come from parallel Oxford s. Will and Lyra decide to travel back into Will&apos;s world to gather more information: Will is seeking information about his father, while Lyra is looking for Scholars who know about Dust. The alethiometer tells Lyra where to find a Scholar, but informs her that she should put her mind to helping Will find his father. However, Lyra is curious to learn more about the nature of Dust and goes to Oxford University to find the scholar, Dr. Mary Malone. Dr. Malone shares Lyra&apos;s interest in Dust, which she calls &quot; shadows. &quot; Lyra returns with Will to Cittàgazze. Despite the alethiometer&apos;s message, Lyra revisits Dr. Malone the next day. She escapes from a trap and is offered a ride by a man she had met the previous day in a museum, Sir Charles Latrom. To her dismay, Lyra soon discovers that Sir Charles has stolen her alethiometer and she asks Will to help her retrieve it. When Lyra and Will confront Sir Charles, he admits that he has stolen the alethiometer. He makes an agreement with the pair that if they retrieve a certain knife from Cittàgazze and give it to him, he will return the alethiometer to Lyra. Will notes that he holds a green snake in his sleeve, marking him as a man from Lyra&apos;s world. The pair successfully retrieve the knife, but Will loses the last two fingers on his left hand. This signifies that he is the new bearer of the Subtle Knife, a tool that can create windows between worlds and can cut easily through anything. Realizing that Sir Charles is not trustworthy, Lyra and Will decide to use the knife to steal the alethiometer. While doing so, Lyra sees that Sir Charles is meeting with Mrs. Coulter, whom Sir Charles has brought from Lyra&apos;s world. She realizes that Sir Charles is really Lord Boreal, a friend of Mrs. Coulter who came to Will&apos;s world long ago and established himself in a position of power. Will, overhearing their conversation, also hears news of his father, who had discovered a doorway between the worlds. Will and Lyra return to Cittagazze, where they are hunted down by the children, who think it was their fault that one of the adults had his soul sucked out by Specters. Will and Lyra run to a tower where the children almost kill them when they are found by Serafina Pekkala. She attempts to heal Will&apos;s wound with a spell, but fails. They then continue on to find Will&apos;s father. Back in Will&apos;s world, Dr. Malone is visited by Sir Charles, who tells them that their funding will be discontinued if they do not cooperate. Dr. Malone quits her job, but returns later that night and takes Lyra&apos;s suggestion to attempt to talk to the Dark Matter using &quot; words. &quot; She discovers that she is to play the &quot; serpent &quot; and all her life&apos;s work has led to this. The Dust also tells her where to begin her journey and instructs her to destroy her work. Lee Scoresby finally finds Grumman living as a shaman known as Jopari. Grumman, who summoned Scoresby, knows of the Subtle Knife and how the bearer can help Lord Asriel&apos;s cause, which will save them all. They set off in Scoresby&apos;s hot-air balloon and Grumman explains that the Subtle Knife is also how the Specters came into the world. Upon reaching Cittàgazze, however, they are caught by the Magisterium&apos;s army. Scoresby dies while holding off the soldiers, giving Grumman a chance to escape. Mrs. Coulter tricks Sir Charles into revealing the secret of the knife. After murdering him, she catches a witch and tortures her, causing her to reveal not only Will and Lyra&apos;s location and their protectors, but that Lyra is fated to be the second Eve. Mrs. Coulter states her intention to destroy Lyra rather than risk a second Fall. Serafina goes to aid Scoresby, having heard his last plea for help. The rest of the party continues on. Will, unable to sleep one night, wanders up a mountain and finds Grumman, who staunches the bleeding in his hand and instructs him to take the knife to Lord Asriel, as it is the tool Asriel needs to win the great war that he is preparing against The Authority. They have a brief moment in which they realize they are actually father and son, but then a vengeful witch who loved Grumman murders him, as he had not returned her love. Will returns to camp to find a pair of angels, Balthamos and Baruch, waiting to guide him to Lord Asriel. He agrees and goes to awaken Lyra, but discovers that she is missing. Will finds Lyra&apos;s alethiometer, which she had left behind. He then refuses to go with the angels until he finds Lyra. This concludes the second novel, with the trilogy concluding in the next book, The Amber Spyglass. [ Critical reception ] Parents&apos; Choice Gold Book Award; American Library Association Best Book for Young Adults; Booklist Editors&apos; Choice; Publishers Weekly Best Book of the Year; Horn Book Fanfare Honor Book; Bulletin Blue Ribbon Book; Book Links Best Book of the Year; American Bookseller Pick of the Lists [ Film, television and theatrical adaptations ] Before the release of The Golden Compass on December 7, 2007, New Line said that an adaptation of The Subtle Knife would go into production only if the first film was a success. [ New Line pulls in pic scribe: Amini to pen second part of Pullman trilogy Mcnary Dave Variety, Los Angeles http://www.variety.com/article/VR1117956728.html?categoryid%3D1236%26amp%3Bcs%3D1 4 January 2007 2007-12-13 ] The Golden Compass made over twice its budget worldwide, but was a disappointment in the United States, leaving the fate of its sequel unclear. The international rights were also originally sold to provide financing for the first film, thus amounting to a significant disappointment for New Line Cinema. Producer Deborah Forte, however, is adamant that she will finish the trilogy, saying, &quot; I believe there are enough people who see what a viable and successful franchise we have. &quot; [ http://www.variety.com/article/VR1117982066.html?categoryid%3D1246%26amp%3Bcs%3D1 &apos;Compass&apos; spins foreign frenzy March 13, 2008 2008-03-13 http://www.variety.com/ Adam Dawtrey ] However, over 4 years after release, it&apos;s likely that the younger members of the cast have now outgrown their roles; especially given that the events of the novel take place immediately following the conclusion of the first story. This presents new significant artistic obstacles in addition to the previously mentioned financial difficulties. As the second novel of the His Dark Materials trilogy, the book has also formed part of a radio drama on BBC Radio 4 starring Terence Stamp as Lord Asriel and Lulu Popplewell as Lyra, and as a two-part, six-hour performance for London &apos;s Royal National Theatre in December 2003, running until March 2004, and a second run between November 2004 and April 2005. [ Footnotes ] [ References ] [ Lenz Millicent 2005 His Dark Materials Illuminated: Critical Essays on Phillip Pullman&apos;s Trilogy Wayne State University Press 0-8143-3207-2 ] [ Frost Laurie 2006 The Elements of His Dark Materials The Fell Press ] [ External links ] BridgetotheStars.net Fansite for His Dark Materials and Philip Pullman HisDarkMaterials.org Graphical timeline (unofficial) ISBN 0-440-41833-X (American paperback edition) Category:1997 novels Category:Anti-Catholic publications Category:British fantasy novels Category:Children&apos;s fantasy novels Category:High fantasy novels Category:His Dark Materials books Category:Novels by Philip Pullman Category:1990s fantasy novels Category:Sequel novels da:Skyggernes Kniv (bog) es:La daga fa:خنجر ظریف (رمان) fr:La Tour des anges id:Pisau Gaib it:La lama sottile he:הסכין המעודן lt:Aštrusis peilis hu:A titokzatos kés nl:Het listige mes no:Den skarpeste kniven pt:The Subtle Knife ru:Чудесный нож (роман) simple: The Subtle Knife sl:Pretanjeni nož fi:Salaperäinen veitsi sk:Magický nôž sv:Den skarpa eggen th:มีดนิรมิต vi:Kỳ Ảo Đao (truyện)