[ May 2012 ] { DeKalb County, Indiana, USA, about 1900 } A barn raising describes a collective action of a community, in which a barn for one of the members is assembled collectively by members of the community. Barn raising was particularly common in 18th- and 19th-century rural North America. A barn was a necessary structure for any farmer, for example for storage of cereals and hay and keeping of animals. Yet a barn was also a large and costly structure, whose assemble required more labor than a typical family could provide. Barn raising addressed the need by enlisting members of the community, unpaid, to assist in the building of their neighbors&apos; barns. Because each member was entitled to recruit others for help, the favor would eventually return to each participant. Barn raising is an example of a fundamental form of human cooperation - indirect reciprocity. In contrast to direct reciprocity (“I help you and you help me”), indirect reciprocity follows the principle of “You help me and I’ll help someone else” or “I help you and someone else will help me” { Nowak, Martin A. and Sigmund, Karl. &quot; Evolution of Indirect Reciprocity. &quot; Nature, 2005, 437, pp. 1291-98 }. It is also known as generalized exchange or pay it forward. Other examples of indirect reciprocity include organ and blood donations, open source software { Levine, Sheen S. and Prietula, Michael J. &quot; Where and When Can Open Source Thrive? Towards a Theory of Robust Performance, &quot; P. Ågerfalk, C. Boldyreff, J. González-Barahona, G. Madey and J. Noll, Open Source Software: New Horizons. Springer Boston, 2010, 156-76. } and more generally - open collaboration { Levine, Sheen S. and Prietula, Michael J. &quot; Open Source, Open Innovation, Open Communities: What Drives the Performance of “Open”?, &quot; L. Toombs, Academy of Management Best Paper Proceedings. Boston: 2012 } The tradition of &quot; barn raising &quot; continues, more or less unchanged, in some Amish and Old Order Mennonite communities, particularly in Ohio, Indiana, Pennsylvania, and some rural parts of Canada. The practice continues outside of these religious communities, albeit less frequently than in the 19th century, in the U.S. states of Maine, New Hampshire, Vermont, and Wisconsin. [ Description ] { Toronto, } { Canada in the 20th century. This area is now occupied by highrise office and condominium buildings. } A certain amount of preparation is done before the one to two days a barn raising requires. Lumber and hardware are laid in, plans are made, ground is cleared, and tradesmen are hired. Materials are purchased or traded for by the family who will own the barn once it is complete. Generally, participation is mandatory for community members. These participants are not paid. All able-bodied members of the community are expected to attend. Failure to attend a barn raising without the best of reasons leads to censure within the community. Some specialists brought in from other communities for direction or joinery may be paid, however. One person, who is often paid, is in charge of the barn raising. Older people who have participated in many barn raisings are crew chiefs. On the whole, the affair is well organized. At most barn raisings, the community members have raised barns before and approach the task with experience both in the individual tasks and the necessary organization. Young people participating physically for the first time have watched many barn raisings and know what is expected of them. Only certain specialists are permitted to work on the more critical jobs, such as the joinery and dowling of the beams. ( Post and beam construction is the traditional method of construction in barn raisings.) There is competition for these jobs, and they are sought after. Differentiation by age and gender leads to men doing the heavy work on the barn, women doing equally heavy work providing water and food, the youngest children watch, and older boys are assigned to fetch parts and tools. [ Social framework ] In earlier American rural life, communities raised barns because many hands were required. In areas that were sparsely settled or on the edge of the frontier, it was not possible to hire carpenters or other tradesmen to build a barn. The harsher winters gave more urgency to the matter of barn construction than was present in the relatively milder climate in much of Europe. Similar conditions have given rise to similar institutions, such as the Finnish one of &apos; talkoot &apos;. Barn raisings occurred in a social framework with a good deal of interdependence. Members of rural communities often shared family bonds going back generations. They traded with each other, buying and selling land, labor, seed, cattle, and the like. They worshipped together. They celebrated together, because cities were too far away to visit with any frequency by horse and wagon. Despite traditions of independence, self-sufficiency, and refusal to incur debt to one another, community barn raisings were a part of life. [ Contrast with church construction ] Churches were considered as important to communities of the 18th and 19th centuries as were barns. In like fashion, they were often constructed using unpaid community labor. There were important differences. Churches were not constructed with the same degree of urgency, and were most often built of native stone — a more durable material than the wood of which barns were made, and more time consuming to lay. Barns, once completed, belonged to an individual family, while churches belonged to the community. [ End of an era ] Barn raising as a method of providing construction labor had become rare by the close of the 19th century. By that time, most frontier communities already had barns and those that did not were constructing them using hired labor. Mennonite and Amish communities carried on the tradition, however, and continue to do so to this day [ August 2011 ]. Group construction by volunteers enjoyed something of a resurgence during the 1970s, when houses, sheds, and barn-shaped structures were constructed for all manner of purposes except the keeping of livestock for a profit. Echoes of the tradition can still be found in other community building projects, such as house building and renovation carried out by Habitat for Humanity. [ Fictional portrayals ] Seven Brides for Seven Brothers ( 1954 ) Witness ( 1985 ) Kingpin ( 1996 ) For Richer or Poorer ( 1997 ) Revolt of Mother ( 2000 ) Plain Truth (2001) [ See also ] Talkoot Dugnad Gadugi [ References ] Category:History of agriculture Category:Agriculture in the United States Category:Construction Category:Mutualism (movement) Category:Vermont culture Category:Amish