Three Si and one Ge (bottom) photodiodes Symbol for photodiode. 350px A photodiode is a type of photodetector capable of converting light into either current or voltage, depending upon the mode of operation. [ Photodiode P04598 ] The common, traditional solar cell used to generateelectric solar power is a large area photodiode. Photodiodes are similar to regular semiconductor diode s except that they may be either exposed (to detect vacuum UV or X-rays ) or packaged with a window or optical fiber connection to allow light to reach the sensitive part of the device. Many diodes designed for use specifically as a photodiode use a PIN junction rather than a p-n junction, to increase the speed of response. A photodiode is designed to operate in reverse bias. [ James F. Cox Fundamentals of linear electronics: integrated and discrete http://books.google.com/books?id%3DFbezraN9tvEC%26amp%3Bpg%3DPA91 20 August 2011 26 June 2001 Cengage Learning 978-0-7668-3018-9 91– ] [ Principle of operation ] A photodiode is a p-n junction or PIN structure. When a photon of sufficient energy strikes the diode, it excites an electron, thereby creating a free electron (and a positively charged electron hole). This mechanism is also known as the inner photoelectric effect. If the absorption occurs in the junction&apos;s depletion region, or one diffusion length away from it, these carriers are swept from the junction by the built-in field of the depletion region. Thus holes move toward the anode, and electrons toward the cathode, and a photocurrent is produced. This photocurrent is the sum of both the dark current (without light) and the light current, so the dark current must be minimized to enhance the sensitivity of the device. { Filip Tavernier, Michiel Steyaert High-Speed Optical Receivers with Integrated Photodiode in Nanoscale CMOS Springer, 2011 ISBN 1-4419-9924-8, Chapter 3 From Light to Electric Current - The Photodiode } [ Photovoltaic mode ] When used in zero bias or photovoltaic mode, the flow of photocurrent out of the device is restricted and a voltage builds up. This mode exploits the photovoltaic effect, which is the basis for solar cell s – a traditional solar cell is just a large area photodiode. [ Photoconductive mode ] In this mode the diode is often reverse biased (with the cathode positive), dramatically reducing the response time at the expense of increased noise. This increases the width of the depletion layer, which decreases the junction&apos;s capacitance resulting in faster response times. The reverse bias induces only a small amount of current (known as saturation or back current) along its direction while the photocurrent remains virtually the same. For a given spectral distribution, the photocurrent is linearly proportional to the illuminance (and to the irradiance ). [ http://hyperphysics.phy-astr.gsu.edu/hbase/Electronic/photdet.html Photodiode slide ] Although this mode is faster, the photoconductive mode tends to exhibit more electronic noise. [ January 2008 ] The leakage current of a good PIN diode is so low ( &lt; 1 nA) that the Johnson–Nyquist noise of the load resistance in a typical circuit often dominates. [ Other modes of operation ] Avalanche photodiode s have a similar structure to regular photodiodes, but they are operated with much higher reverse bias. This allows each photo-generated carrier to be multiplied by avalanche breakdown, resulting in internal gain within the photodiode, which increases the effective responsivity of the device. A phototransistor is in essence a bipolar transistor encased in a transparent case so that light can reach the base-collector junction. It was invented by Dr. John N. Shive (more famous for his wave machine ) at Bell Labs in 1948, [ Crystal Fire: The Invention of the Transistor and the Birth of the Information Age 9780393318517 Michael Riordan and Lillian Hoddeson ] [ 205 ] but it wasn&apos;t announced until 1950. [ http://www.smecc.org/phototransistor.htm The phototransistor May 1950 Bell Laboratories RECORD ] The electrons that are generated by photons in the base-collector junction are injected into the base, and this photodiode current is amplified by the transistor&apos;s current gain β (or h fe ). If the emitter is left unconnected, the phototransistor becomes a photodiode. While phototransistors have a higher responsivity for light they are not able to detect low levels of light any better than photodiodes. [ May 2011 ] Phototransistors also have significantly longer response times. [ Materials ] The material used to make a photodiode is critical to defining its properties, because only photon s with sufficient energy to excite electron s across the material&apos;s bandgap will produce significant photocurrents. Materials commonly used to produce photodiodes include { Held. G, Introduction to Light Emitting Diode Technology and Applications, CRC Press, (Worldwide, 2008). Ch. 5 p. 116. ISBN 1-4200-7662-0 } : Material Electromagnetic spectrum wavelength range (nm) Silicon 190–1100 Germanium 400–1700 Indium gallium arsenide 800–2600 Lead(II) sulfide &lt; 1000–3500 Because of their greater bandgap, silicon-based photodiodes generate less noise than germanium-based photodiodes. [ Unwanted photodiodes ] [ September 2011 ] Any p-n junction, if illuminated, is potentially a photodiode. Semiconductor devices such as transistors and ICs contain p-n junctions, and will not function correctly if they are illuminated by unwanted electromagnetic radiation (light) of wavelength suitable to produce a photocurrent; this is avoided by encapsulating devices in opaque housings. If these housings are not completely opaque to high-energy radiation (ultraviolet, X-rays, gamma rays), transistors and ICs can malfunction due to induced photo-currents. Plastic cases are more vulnerable than metal ones. [ Features ] Response of a silicon photo diode vs wavelength of the incident light Critical performance parameters of a photodiode include: Responsivity The ratio of generated photocurrent to incident light power, typically expressed in A / W when used in photoconductive mode. The responsivity may also be expressed as a Quantum efficiency, or the ratio of the number of photogenerated carriers to incident photons and thus a unitless quantity. Dark current The current through the photodiode in the absence of light, when it is operated in photoconductive mode. The dark current includes photocurrent generated by background radiation and the saturation current of the semiconductor junction. Dark current must be accounted for by calibration if a photodiode is used to make an accurate optical power measurement, and it is also a source of noise when a photodiode is used in an optical communication system. Noise-equivalent power (NEP) The minimum input optical power to generate photocurrent, equal to the rms noise current in a 1 hertz bandwidth. The related characteristic detectivity (D) is the inverse of NEP, 1/NEP; and the specific detectivity ( D^\star ) is the detectivity normalized to the area (A) of the photodetector, D^\star=D\sqrt{A}. The NEP is roughly the minimum detectable input power of a photodiode. When a photodiode is used in an optical communication system, these parameters contribute to the sensitivity of the optical receiver, which is the minimum input power required for the receiver to achieve a specified bit error rate. [ Applications ] P-N photodiodes are used in similar applications to other photodetector s, such as photoconductor s, charge-coupled device s, and photomultiplier tubes. They may be used to generate an output which is dependent upon the illumination (analog; for measurement and the like), or to change the state of circuitry (digital; either for control and switching, or digital signal processing). Photodiodes are used in consumer electronics devices such as compact disc players, smoke detector s, and the receivers for infrared remote control devices used to control equipment from television s to air conditioners. For many applications either photodiodes or photoconductors may be used. Either type of photosensor may be used for light measurement, as in camera light meters, or to respond to light levels, as in switching on street lighting after dark. Photosensors of all types may be used to respond to incident light, or to a source of light which is part of the same circuit or system. A photodiode is often combined into a single component with an emitter of light, usually a light-emitting diode (LED), either to detect the presence of a mechanical obstruction to the beam ( slotted optical switch ), or to couple two digital or analog circuits while maintaining extremely high electrical isolation between them, often for safety ( optocoupler ). Photodiodes are often used for accurate measurement of light intensity in science and industry. They generally have a more linear response than photoconductors. They are also widely used in various medical applications, such as detectors for computed tomography (coupled with scintillator s ), instruments to analyze samples ( immunoassay ), and pulse oximeter s. PIN diode s are much faster and more sensitive than p-n junction diodes, and hence are often used for optical communication s and in lighting regulation. P-N photodiodes are not used to measure extremely low light intensities. Instead, if high sensitivity is needed, avalanche photodiode s, intensified charge-coupled device s or photomultiplier tubes are used for applications such as astronomy, spectroscopy, night vision equipment and laser rangefinding. [ Comparison with photomultipliers ] Advantages compared to photomultiplier s { Photodiode Technical Guide on Hamamatsu website } : [ May 2012 ] Excellent linearity of output current as a function of incident light Spectral response from 190  nm to 1100  nm ( silicon ), longer wavelength s with other semiconductor materials Low noise Ruggedized to mechanical stress Low cost Compact and light weight Long lifetime High quantum efficiency, typically 80% No high voltage required Disadvantages compared to photomultiplier s : Small area No internal gain (except avalanche photodiode s, but their gain is typically 10 2 –10 3 compared to up to 10 8 for the photomultiplier) Much lower overall sensitivity Photon counting only possible with specially designed, usually cooled photodiodes, with special electronic circuits Response time for many designs is slower [ Photodiode array ] A one-dimensional array of hundreds or thousands of photodiodes can be used as a position sensor, for example as part of an angle sensor. [ Precision Nanometrology: Sensors and Measuring Systems for Nanomanufacturing Wei Gao Springer 2010 978-1-84996-253-7 15–16 http://books.google.com/books?id%3DN0ys_sSxD60C%26amp%3Bpg%3DPA15 ] One advantage of photodiode arrays (PDAs) is that they allow for high speed parallel read out since the driving electronics may not be built in like a traditional CMOS or CCD sensor. [ See also ] [ 3 ] Electronics Band gap Infrared Optoelectronics Optical interconnect Light Peak Interconnect bottleneck Optical fiber cable Optical communication Parallel optical interface Opto-isolator Semiconductor device Solar cell Avalanche photodiode Transducer LEDs as Photodiode Light Sensors Light meter Image sensor [ References ] Gowar, John, Optical Communication Systems, 2 ed., Prentice-Hall, Hempstead UK, 1993 (ISBN 0-13-638727-6) [ External links ] Technical Information Hamamatsu Photonics Using the Photodiode to convert the PC to a Light Intensity Logger Design Fundamentals for Phototransistor Circuits Working principles of photodiodes Category:Optical devices Category:Optoelectronics Category:Optical diodes Category:Photonics ar:ثنائي ضوئي bg:Фотодиод ca:Fotodíode cs:Fotodioda da:Fotodiode de:Photodiode et:Fotodiood es:Fotodiodo eo:Fotodiodo fa:فوتودیود fr:Photodiode ko:광다이오드 hr:Fotodioda id:Fotodiode it:Fotodiodo he:פוטודיודה kk:Фотодиод lt:Fotodiodas hu:Fotodióda ml:ഫോട്ടോഡയോഡ് nl:Fotodiode ja:フォトダイオード no:Fotodiode pl:Fotodioda półprzewodnikowa pt:Fotodiodo ru:Фотодиод sk:Fotodióda sr:Фотодиода fi:Fotodiodi sv:Fotodiod tr:Fotodiyot uk:Фотодіод ur:ضیا دوبرقیرہ zh:光电二极管