[ Range San Gabriel Mountains Telegraph Cucamonga and Ontario Peaks.jpg Summits in the eastern San Gabriel Mountains, Angeles National Forest, San Bernardino County, California. The main peaks are: Telegraph Peak 8985&apos; (left), Cucamonga Peak 8859&apos; (center), Ontario Peak 8693&apos; (center right). As seen from Baldy Bowl on Mount Baldy. United States California Counties Los Angeles San Bernardino 34.28889 -117.64672 Mount San Antonio 10068 Wpdms shdrlfi020l san gabriel mountains.jpg 68.4 22.5 970 ] The San Gabriel Mountains Range is located in northern Los Angeles County and western San Bernardino County, California, United States. [ 254210 San Gabriel Mountains 2009-05-03 ] The mountain range lies between the Los Angeles Basin and the Mojave Desert, with Interstate 5 to the west and Interstate 15 to the east. This Transverse Range lies in, and is surrounded by, the Angeles National Forest, with the San Andreas Fault as the northern border of the range. The highest peak in the range is Mount San Antonio, commonly referred to as Mt. Baldy. Mount Wilson is another famous peak, famed for the Mount Wilson Observatory and the antenna farm that houses many of the transmitters for local media. The observatory may be visited by the public. [ Geography ] The highest elevation, Mount San Antonio at 10,064 ft., rises towards the eastern extremity of the range which extends from the Cajon Pass (Interstate 15 Freeway) on the east, where the San Gabriel Mountain Range meets the San Bernardino Mountain Range, westward to meet the Santa Monica and Santa Susanna ranges at approximately Tejon Pass (Interstate 5 Freeway). The Range is bound on the north by the Antelope Valley and the Mojave Desert and to the south by the communities of greater Los Angeles area. In the western portion of the San Gabriel Mountain Range, the Sierra Pelona Ridge stretches from approximately Soledad Canyon (14 Freeway and railroad right-of-way), formed by the Santa Clara River. The Sierra Pelona Ridge includes Liebre Mountain, Sawmill Mountain, Grass Mountain, Redrock Peak, Burnt Peak, most of which is part of the Angeles National Forest, but also features several rural communities. North of San Fernando, the San Gabriel Mountains crest abruptly up to almost [ 4,000 ft m ]. Pacoima and Big Tujunga Canyon s cut through the range just east of San Fernando, carrying runoff into the San Fernando Valley. Little Tujunga Canyon Road bridges the range in this area, connecting the San Fernando Valley to the Santa Clara River valley in the north. Towering over Big Tujunga Canyon north of Big Tujunga Reservoir is Mount Gleason, which at [ 6,502 ft m ], is the highest in this region of the San Gabriels. South of the gorge are the southern &quot; foothills &quot; of the mountains, which rise abruptly [ 4,000 ft m ] above the Los Angeles Basin and give rise to the Arroyo Seco, a tributary of the Los Angeles River. Southeast of Big Tujunga Canyon, the southern front range of the San Gabriels gradually grows in elevation, culminating in notable peaks such as Mount Wilson at [ 5,710 ft m ]. On the north the range is abruptly dissected by the canyon of the West Fork San Gabriel River. Even further north the range slopes up into the towering main crest of the San Gabriels, a sweeping arc-shaped massif [ 30 mi km ] in length that includes most of the highest peaks in the range: Waterman Mountain, at [ 8,038 ft m ]; Mount Islip, at [ 8,250 ft m ], Mount Baden-Powell, at [ 9,399 ft m ], Pine Mountain, at [ 9648 ft m ], and finally Mount San Antonio, the highest peak in the range at [ 10,068 ft m ]. East Fork San Gabriel River canyon, looking west Melting snow and rain runoff on the south side of the San Gabriels&apos; highest mountains give rise to its largest river, the San Gabriel River. Just to the west of Mount Hawkins, a north-south divide separates water running down the two main forks of the river and their tributaries. The West Fork, beginning at Red Box Saddle, runs [ 14 mi km ] eastward, and the East Fork, starting north of Mount San Antonio, flows [ 18 mi km ] south and west through a steep, rugged and precipitous gorge. The two meet at San Gabriel Reservoir, and turn south, boring through the southern portion of the San Gabriels, emptying out of the mountains near Azusa into the urban San Gabriel Valley, and eventually to the Pacific Ocean near Seal Beach. On the north slopes of the San Gabriel crest, the northern ranks of mountains drop down incrementally to the floor of the Mojave Desert in a much more gradual manner than the sheer southern flank. The Angeles Crest Highway, one of the main routes across the San Gabriels, runs through this area from west to east. Little Rock, Big Rock and Sheep Creeks drain off the northern part of the mountains, forming large alluvial fan s as they descend into the Mojave. To the east, the San Andreas Fault cuts across the range, forming a series of long, straight and narrow depressions, including Swarthout Valley and Lone Pine Canyon. South of Mount San Antonio, San Antonio Creek drains the mountains, cutting the deep San Antonio Canyon. East of San Antonio Canyon, the range gradually loses elevation, and the highest peaks in this section of the mountain range are in the south, rising dramatically above the Inland Empire cities of Claremont, Upland and Rancho Cucamonga. However, there are still several notable peaks in this region, including Telegraph Peak, at [ 8,985 ft m ], Cucamonga Peak, at [ 8,859 ft m ], and Ontario Peak, rising [ 8,693 ft m ]. Lytle Creek, flowing generally southwest, drains most of the extreme eastern San Gabriels. The range terminates at Cajon Pass, through which runs Interstate 15, and beyond which rise the even higher San Bernardino Mountains. [ Ecology ] Numerous species of flora and fauna can be found within the San Gabriel Mountains, especially within the range of microclimate and elevation variation. There are both areas of conifer as well as broadleaf forestation, including the presence of some endemic taxa. For example, there is a subspecies of the Leather Oak which is found only within the San Gabriel Mountains. { C.Michael Hogan. 2010. &apos;&apos;Leather Oak, Quercus durata&apos;&apos;. Encyclopedia of Earth. National Council for Science and Environment. Washington DC } The Rift Zone along the San Andreas Fault produces numerous springs, sag ponds, and wetland areas that are critical habitat for a variety of native species. [ Transportation ] Telegraph Peak as seen from the ridge of Devils Backbone on Mount San Antonio. The main road that runs through the San Gabriel Mountains is the Angeles Crest Highway, State Route 2. It starts in the southwest at the city of La Cañada Flintridge and ends at its junction with State Route 138, just past Wrightwood, near the Victor Valley and the West Cajon Valley. Past its junction with Angeles Forest Highway, traveling east, Angeles Crest Highway features blind curves, various bumps, and potholes. This section of the &quot; Crest &quot; is closed during the winter due to rockfall and avalanche hazards. State Route 2, just past Mountain High, is called the Big Pines Highway all the way to the Route 138 junction. Another key county route which connects Angeleno s to, and through, the mountains is Angeles Forest Highway. Angeles Forest Highway begins 11 miles northeast of La Cañada Flintridge at its Angeles Crest Highway junction. Ending near Acton, it allows easy access to the central Forest and the fast growing Antelope Valley. Because the &quot; Forest &quot; and the 11 mile &quot; Crest &quot; portion leading to La Cañada Flintridge is well traveled by Antelope Valley commuters, its road maintenance is much better, and it is open much of the winter. State Route 39 connected the city of Azusa with the Angeles Crest Highway until it was seriously damaged by landslides, first in 1978, and again in 2005. The highway was opened to emergency crews in February 2003. The proposed State Route 39 Roadway Rehabilitation Project would begin five miles (8  km) north of Crystal Lake Recreation Area Campground. [ April 2011 ] According to the Caltrans District Seven &quot; Inside Seven &quot; Newsletter, work will continue through 2009 and 2010 on reconstruction. As written in the newsletter, &quot; Two projects that will address those issues and get the highway reopened are scheduled for construction soon. The first, building two retaining walls near the city of Azusa from Old San Gabriel Canyon Road to approximately four miles south of SR-2, could begin in mid-2009. The second, a $45 million project to reconstruct the roadway, construct soldier pile retaining walls, repair drainage systems, install rock fall protection, and provide asphalt concrete overlay and traffic striping, should begin in fall 2010. &quot; (source) People heading to Mount Waterman must now travel west to Pasadena and then travel on the Angeles Crest Highway (Highway 2) in La Canada Flintridge - a nearly two-hour trip. Reopening Highway 39 would cut the drive-time to the Waterman Ski Area in half and shorten the trip east to Wrightwood. The segment connecting the Crystal Lake Recreation Area to Route 2 is not scheduled to reopen before 2015. [ Recreation ] The San Gabriel Mountains from the south. In the winter, snowboarding and snow skiing are quite popular in the San Gabriels, at Mountain High and Mt. Baldy. The two other resorts, Mount Waterman and Kratka Ridge, are rarely open. In the summer, &quot; canyoneering &quot;, hiking, backpacking, picnicking and camping are some of the activities popular with visitors. From time to time, a hiker gets lost or stuck on a mountain ledge, or may fall downhill. Some of the more extreme cases of emergency search-and-rescue efforts will often be given air time on Los Angeles television and radio newscasts. The Pacific Crest Trail passes along the mountain ridge. During the winter, many Southern California mountaineers climb a variety of snow routes and even some ice routes in the San Gabriel Mountains. Baldy Bowl is by far the most popular route, getting hundreds of climbers per season. There are many other routes, offering a variety of choices. Rock climbing is not as common in the San Gabriel Range as it is in neighboring areas, as this range is famous for loose rock. Various faults crisscross the range, making it one of the steepest and fastest-growing ranges in the world. Plate tectonic activity breaks up most rock, making it unsuitable for rock climbing. Williamson Rock was the most famous climbing area, until it was closed for climbing. There are many other craggy areas scattered about the range that provide mostly traditional climbing opportunities. Angeles National Forest Fire Lookout Association has rebuilt and operates Vetter Mountain Lookout, and Slide Mountain Lookout. The organization is rebuilding South Mount Hawkins Lookout. [ Major peaks ] Mount San Antonio from Throop Peak. View near Cajon Junction, California. View of the San Gabriel Mountains from Cajon Pass Mount San Antonio, a.k.a. Mt. Baldy, 3,069 m (10,068  ft) Pine Mountain 2,940 m (9,648  ft) Dawson Peak 2,918 m (9,575  ft) Mount Harwood 2,911 m (9,552  ft) Mount Baden-Powell 2,865 m (9,399  ft) Mount Burnham 2,742 m (8,997  ft) Throop Peak 2,785m (9,138  ft) Telegraph Peak 2,739 m (8,985  ft) Cucamonga Peak 2,721 m (8,859  ft) Ontario Peak 2,650 m (8,693  ft) Mount Islip 2,515 m (8,250  ft) Iron Mountain 2,441m (8,007  ft) South Mount Hawkins 2,372 m (7,783  ft) Strawberry Peak 1,878 m (6,164  ft) San Gabriel Peak 1,877 m (6,161  ft) Vetter Mountain 1,800 m (5,908  ft) (site of active fire lookout tower ) Mount Wilson 1,740 m (5,710  ft) (site of Mount Wilson Observatory ) Mount Disappointment 1,817 m (5,960  ft) Mount Lowe 1,707 m (5,603  ft) (site of Mount Lowe Railway ) Mount Lukens 1,544 m (5,066  ft) Echo Mountain 977 m (3,207  ft) [ Nearby ranges ] San Rafael Hills Santa Ana Mountains Verdugo Mountains San Bernardino Mountains Santa Susana Mountains Santa Monica Mountains Sierra Pelona Mountains Tehachapi Mountains [ File:San Gabriel panorama 2.jpg 180 Panorama of the range, from Ontario Peak looking west and north, Mount Baldy in the center. ] [ References ] [ External links ] Outdoor LA Hiking Trails – Hiking trails in the area with maps and directions to the trailheads. Geographic, Biological, and Geological information San Gabriel Mountains around Wrightwood, CA Category:Transverse Ranges Category:Mountain ranges of Los Angeles County, California Category:Mountain ranges of San Bernardino County, California Category:Mountain ranges of the Mojave Desert Category:Mountain ranges of Southern California ar:جبال سان غابرييل de:San Gabriel Mountains et:San Gabrieli mäed es:Sierra de San Gabriel fr:Monts San Gabriel id:Pegunungan San Gabriel it:San Gabriel Mountains nl:San Gabriel Mountains pl:San Gabriel (góry) ru:Сан-Габриель (горы) simple:San Gabriel Mountains sv:San Gabriel Mountains