[ August 2008 ] Shaking hands after a sports match is an example of a social norm. Social norms are described by sociologists as being laws that govern society’s behaviors { Marshall, G. Oxford Dictionary of Sociology. }. Although these norms are not considered to be formal laws within society, they still work to promote a great deal of social control { Marshall, G. Oxford Dictionary of Sociology. }. Social norms can be enforced formally (e.g., through sanctions) or informally (e.g., through body language and non-verbal communication cues { Marshall, G. Oxford Dictionary of Sociology. }.) If people do not follow these norms then they become labeled as deviants and this can lead to them being considered the outcast of society { Marshall, G. Oxford Dictionary of Sociology. }. It is important to note that what is considered “normal” is relative to the location of the culture in which the social interaction is taking place { Marshall, G. Oxford Dictionary of Sociology. }. Norms in every culture create conformity that allows for people to become socialized to the culture in which they live { Marshall, G. Oxford Dictionary of Sociology. }. Sociology’s theorists such as Talcott Parsons and Karl Marx have both come up with theories for why they believe norms are needed in society { Marshall, G. Oxford Dictionary of Sociology. }. According to Parsons of the functionalist school, norms dictate the interactions of people in all social encounters { Marshall, G. Oxford Dictionary of Sociology. }. On the other hand, Marx believes that norms are used to promote the creation of roles in society which allows for people of different levels of social class structure to be able to function properly { Marshall, G. Oxford Dictionary of Sociology. }. Marx claims that this power dynamic creates social order { Marshall, G. Oxford Dictionary of Sociology }. As social beings, individuals learn when and where it is appropriate to say certain things, to use certain words, to discuss certain topics or wear certain clothes, and when it is not. Thus, knowledge about cultural norms is important for impressions, { Kamau, C. (2009) Strategizing impression management in corporations: cultural knowledge as capital. In D. Harorimana (Ed) Cultural implications of knowledge sharing, management and transfer: identifying competitive advantage. Chapter 4. Information Science Reference. ISBN 978-1-60566-790-4 } which is an individual&apos;s regulation of their nonverbal behavior. One also comes to know through experience what types of people he/she can and cannot discuss certain topics with or wear certain types of dress around { Kamau, C. (2009) Strategizing impression management in corporations: cultural knowledge as capital. In D. Harorimana (Ed) Cultural implications of knowledge sharing, management and transfer: identifying competitive advantage. Chapter 4. Information Science Reference. ISBN 978-1-60566-790-4 }. Typically, this knowledge is derived through experience (i.e. social norms are learned through social interaction ) { Kamau, C. (2009) Strategizing impression management in corporations: cultural knowledge as capital. In D. Harorimana (Ed) Cultural implications of knowledge sharing, management and transfer: identifying competitive advantage. Chapter 4. Information Science Reference. ISBN 978-1-60566-790-4 }. An example of the need to police his or her behavior would be when people go to a job interview in the white collar work force and dress properly in order to give a great first impression so that they get the job. [ Formal vs. Informal ] Groups may adopt norms in two different ways. One form of norm adoption is the formal method, where norms are written down and implemented (e.g., laws, legislation, club rules) { Kendall, D. Sociology in Our Times (2011). }. However, social norms are much more likely to be informal, and emerge gradually (e.g., not wearing socks with sandals) { Chong, D. (2000) Rational lives: norms and values in politics and society }. Norms can exist as both formal and informal rules of behavior. Both types of norms are described more clearly below: Informal : Informal norms are not necessarily laws set in writing, but are more so just routines that people follow in everyday life Gerber, L. and Macionis, J. (2011) Sociology: Seventh Canadian Edition. page 65.. These informal norms, if broken, do not invite punishments or sanctions usually, but instead encourage reprimands, warnings, or othering Gerber, L. and Macionis, J. (2011) Sociology: Seventh Canadian Edition. page 65.. Norms that are widely observed have great moral significance Gerber, L. and Macionis, J. (2011). Sociology: Seventh Canadian Edition. page 65.. For example, incest is generally thought of as wrong in society, but many jurisdictions do not legally prohibit it. Formal : Formal norms are generally laws that if broken will result in some form of punishment Kendall, D. Sociology in Our Times (2011).. A large number of these norms we follow naturally such as driving on the right side of the road in the United States or not speeding in order to avoid a ticket Kendall, D. Sociology in Our Times (2011).. These norms serve to provide safety to the general public (i.e. gun laws, traffic laws, etc.). [ Transmission of social norms ] Groups internalize norms by accepting them as reasonable and proper standards for behaviour within the group. Once firmly established, a norm becomes a social fact, and thus, a part of the group&apos;s operational structure, and is difficult to change. With that being said, newcomers to a group can change a group&apos;s norms. However, it is much more likely that the new individual entering the group will adopt the group&apos;s norms, values, and perspectives, rather than the other way around. Also, norms that are counter to the behaviours of the overarching society or culture may be transmitted and maintained within small subgroups of society. For example, Crandall (1988) noted that certain social groups (e.g., cheerleading squads, dance troupes, sports teams, sororities) have a rate of bulimia that is much higher than society as a whole. Social groups have a big influence on social norms. Robert Jacobs and Donald Campbell&apos;s conducted a study and found that Confederates initially established a norm regarding rule use: Half the groups began with a majority rule and half with a seniority-based dictatorial rule. Groups made decisions about hiring (fictitious) job applicants. Half the groups in each decision rule condition received feedback that their decisions were correct and half that their decisions were incorrect. Groups that began with majority rule continued to use the rule. Groups that began with seniority rule always changed the rule and always changed it to majority rule. { Nielsen, Michael E. &quot; The Transmission of Norms Regarding Group Decision Rules &quot;. 2002 } Social norms have a way of maintaining order and organizing groups. { Haung, Peter, Wu, Ho-Mou. &quot; More Order without More Law: A Theory of Social Norms and Organizational Cultures &quot;. (1994) } Social norms demonstrate how ideal a society should be. { Haung, Peter, Wu, Ho-Mou. &quot; More Order without More Law: A Theory of Social Norms and Organizational Cultures &quot;. (1994) } It is the job of groups in society to carry out these social norms. { Haung, Peter,Wu, Ho-Mou. &quot; More Order without More Law: A Theory of Social Norms and Organizational Cultures &quot;. (1994) } [ Terms related to social norms ] A &apos;Descriptive Norm&apos; refers to people&apos;s perceptions of what is commonly done in specific situations. An Injunctive Norm refers to people&apos;s perceptions of what is commonly approved or disapproved of within a particular culture. { Schultz, Nolan, Cialdini, Goldstein, Griskevicius. (2007). The constructive, destructive, and reconstructive power of social norms. Psychological Science 18 (5) pp 429–434 }. In other words an &apos;Injunctive Norm&apos; is what significant other thinks the person should to do. { Rivis, Amanda, Sheeran, Paschal. &quot; Descriptive Norms as an Additional Predictor in the Theory of Planned Behaviour: A Meta-Analysis &quot;. 2003 } Prescriptive norms are unwritten rules that are understood and followed by society; state what we should do. Everyone does these every day without thinking about them. Example: locking the doors of your home or car at night. Proscriptive norms are unwritten rules that are known by society that one shouldn&apos;t do, or follow. These norms can vary from culture to culture. Example: arriving late to appointments or meetings. &apos;Subjective Norm&apos; is determined by beliefs about the extent to which important others want them to perform a behavior. Social influences are conceptualized in terms of the pressure that people perceive from important others to perform, or not to perform, a behavior. { Rivis, Amanda, Sheeran, Paschal. &quot; Descriptive Norms as an Additional Predictor in the Theory of Planned Behaviour: A Meta-Analysis &quot;. 2003 } Deviance is &quot; nonconformity to a set of norms that are accepted by a significant number of people in a community or society (Appelbaum, 173). &quot; In simple terms it is behavior that goes against norms. &apos;The Looking-Glass Self&apos; is theory formed by Charles Cooley that states that our self-concepts are formed as reflections of the responses and evaluations of others in our environment. { Gecas, Viktor, Schwalbe, Michael. (1989). &quot; Beyond the Looking-Glass Self: Social Structure and Efficacy-Based Self-Esteem &quot;. }. [ Example of a norm ] Norms affect the way one behaves in public. When one enters an elevator, it is expected that one turns around to face the doors. An example of a social norm violation would be to enter the elevator and remain facing the rest of the people. People conform to society by following social norms. { Elster, J. (1989). Social Norms and Economic Theory }. Another example would be tipping a waitress at a restaurant. A violation of that social norm would be not tipping the waitress. { Elster, J. (1989). Social Norms and Economic Theory } The community has a lot to do with the development of social norms. { Kandori, M. (1992). Social Norms and Community Enforcement }. A person that chooses to throw trash away in a garbage can is following social norms, but an individual violating the norm would chose to litter. { Kandori, M. (1992). Social Norms and Community Enforcement }. Although it is not illegal to not be courteous it is a social norm. { Posner, E. (2002). Law and Social Norms }. A man holding the door for a woman is considered to be a social norm; a man violating the social norm would chose to not open the door for the woman and let her enter first. { Posner, E. (2002). Law and Social Norms }. [ Game-theoretical analysis of social norms ] A general formal framework that can be used to represent the essential elements of the social situation surrounding a norm is the repeated game of game theory. A norm gives a person a rule of thumb for how they should behave. However, a rational person only acts according to the rule if it is optimal for them. The situation can be described as follows. A norm gives an expectation of how other people act in a given situation (macro). A person acts optimally given the expectation (micro). For a norm to be stable, people&apos;s actions must reconstitute the expectation without change (micro-macro feedback loop). A set of such correct stable expectations is known as a Nash equilibrium. Thus, a stable norm must constitute a Nash equilibrium. { Bicchieri, Cristina. 2006. The Grammar of Society: The Nature and Dynamics of Social Norms, New York: Cambridge University Press, Ch. 1 } From a game theoretical point of view, there are two explanation s for the vast variety of norms that exist throughout the world. One is the difference in games. Different parts of the world may give different environmental contexts and different people may have different values, which may result in a difference in games. The other is equilibrium selection not explicable by the game itself. Equilibrium selection is closely related to coordination. For a simple example, driving is common throughout the world, but in some countries people drive on the right and in other countries people drive on the left (see coordination game ). A framework called comparative institutional analysis is proposed to deal with the game theoretical structural understanding of the variety of social norms. [ See also ] [ Sociology ] Anomie Breaching experiment Civilization Conformity Convention (norm) Cool (aesthetic) Counterculture Heteronormativity Ideology Intercultural competence Morality Norm (philosophy) Norm of reciprocity Peer pressure Personality psychology Rule complex Social norms marketing Taboo [ Bibliography ] [ Axelrod Robert Robert Axelrod 1984 The Evolution of Cooperation New York: Basic Books ] [ McElreath R. Boyd R. Richerson P.J. 2003 Shared norms and the evolution of ethnic markers Current Anthropology 1 122–129 http://arbeit.ucdavis.edu/mcelreath/files/ethnic%20markers%202003.pdf 44 10.1086/345689 ] Appelbaum, R. P., Carr, D., Duneir, M., Giddens, A., 2009, &quot; Confomity, Deviance, and Crime. &quot; Introduction to Sociology, New York, NY: W. W. Norton &amp; Company, Inc., p173. Becker, Howard S, 1982, &quot; Culture: A Sociological View, &quot; Yale Review, 71(4): 513–27 Bicchieri, Cristina. 2006. The Grammar of Society: The Nature and Dynamics of Social Norms, New York: Cambridge University Press Blumer, Herbert, 1956, &quot; Sociological Analysis and the &apos;Variable,&apos; &quot; American Sociological Review, 21(6): 683–90 Boyd, Robert and Peter J. Richerson, 1985, Culture and the Evolutionary Process, Chicago: University of Chicago Press Burt, Ronald S, 1987, &quot; Social Contagion and Innovation: Cohesive Versus Structural Equivalence, &quot; American Journal of Sociology 92(6): 1287–1335 Cialdini, R., 2007, Descriptive Social Norms as Underappreciated Sources of Social Control, Psychometrika, vol. 72, no. 2, 263–268, Durkheim, Emile, 1915, The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life, New York: Free Press Elster, Jon, 1989, Social norms and economic theory, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 3, no. 4, 99–117 Fehr, Ernst, Urs Fischbacher, and Simon Gächter, 2002, Strong reciprocity, human cooperation, and the enforcement of social norms, Human Nature, 13, 1–25 Fine, Gary Alan, 2001, Social Norms, ed. by Michael Hechter and Karl-Dieter Opp, New York, NY: Russell Sage Foundation Greif, Avner. 1994. &quot; Cultural Beliefs and the Organization of Society: A Historical and Theoretical Reflection on Collectivist and Individualist Societies. &quot; The Journal of Political Economy, vol. 102, No. 5: 912–50. Hechter, Michael and Karl-Dieter Opp, eds, 2001, Social Norms, New York:Russell Sage Foundation Heiss, Jerold, 1981, &quot; Social Roles, &quot; In &apos;&apos;Social Psychology: Sociological Perspectives, edited by Morris Rosenburg and Ralph H. Turner, New York: Basic Books. Hochschild, Arlie, 1989, &quot; The Economy of Gratitude, &quot; In The Sociology of Emotions: Original Essays and Research Papers, edited by David D. Franks and E. Doyle McCarthy, Greenwich, Conn.: JAI Press Horne, Christine, 2001, Social Norms, ed. by Michael Hechter and Karl-Dieter Opp, New York, NY: Russell Sage Foundation Kahneman and Miller (1986) Norm Theory: Comparing reality to its alternatives, Psychological Review, 80, 136–153 Kollock, Peter, 1994. &quot; The Emergence of Exchange Structures: An Experimental Study of Uncertainty, Commitment, and Trust. &quot; American Journal of Sociology 100(2): 313–45 Kohn, Melvin L, 1977, Class and Conformity: A Study in Values, 2d ed Chicago: University of Chicago Press Macy, Michael W and John Skvoretz, 1998, &quot; The Evolution of Trust and Cooperation Between Strangers: A Computational Model, &quot; American Sociological Review, 63(5): 638–60 Mark, Noah, 1998, &quot; Birds of a Feather Sing Together, &quot; Social Forces 77(2): 453–85 Opp, Karl-Dieter, 1982, &quot; The Evolutionary Emergence of Norms, &quot; British Journal of Social Psychology, 21(2): 139–49 Posner, Eric, 1996, &quot; The Regulation of Solidary Groups: The Influence of Legal and Nonlegal Sanctions on Collective Action, &quot; University of Chicago Law Review 63(1): 133–97 Posner, Eric. 2000. Law and Social Norms. Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press Prentice, D. A. and Miller, D. T. (1993) Pluralistic ignorance and alcohol use on campus: Some consequences of misperceiving the social norm, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 64, 243–256 Schultz, P.W., Nolan, J. M., Cialdini, R. B., Goldstein, N. J., Griskevicius, V., 2007, The Constructive, Destructive, and Reconstructive Power of Social Norms, Psychological Science, vol. 18, no. 5, 429–434, 2007 Scott, John Finley, 1971, Internalization of Norms: A Sociological Theory of Moral Commitment, Englewoods Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice–Hall Ullmann-Margalit, Edna, 1977, The Emergence of Norms. Oxford: Oxford University Press Yamagishi, Toshio, Karen S. Cook, and Motoki Watabe. 1998. &quot; Uncertainty, Trust, and Commitment Formation in the United States and Japan, &quot; American Journal of Sociology, 104(1), 165–94 Young, H. Peyton, 2008. &quot; social norms. &quot; The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, 2nd Edition. Abstract. [ References ] [ External links ] [ social-norms Social Norms Cristina Bicchieri and Ryan Muldoon ] Category:Sociological terms Category:Social concepts Category:Sociology index af:Norme ar:معايير إجتماعية zh-min-nan:Siā-hoē kui-hoān ca:Norma social cs:Sociální norma da:Norm (sociologi) de:Soziale Norm es:Norma social fa:هنجار fr:Norme sociale ko:규범 id:Norma (sosiologi) it:Norma (scienze sociali) he:נורמה lv:Norma (socioloģija) hu:Társadalmi norma nl:Norm (sociale wetenschappen) ja:規範 no:Norm nn:Norm pl:Norma społeczna pt:Norma social ru:Норма (правило) sk:Norma (sociológia) sl:Norma fi:Normi (sosiologia) sv:Social norm th:บรรทัดฐาน uk:Соціальна норма ur:عالمی معیار vi:Chuẩn mực xã hội zh:社會規範