[ Denmark ] { Odense Esbjerg Kolding Sønderborg Slagelse Copenhagen } { EUA } { 200px } The University of Southern Denmark, with campuses located in the southwestern part of Denmark - i.e. Funen, Southern Jutland and Sealand - is a research and educational institution with deep regional roots and an international outlook. Reaching even further south, the university offers a number of joint programmes in co-operation with the University of Flensburg and the University of Kiel. Contacts with regional industries and the international scientific community are strong. [ History ] The University of Southern Denmark (Syddansk Universitet) was formed in 1998 (but dates back to 1966) by the merger between Odense University (founded in 1966), Southern Denmark School of Business and Engineering and South Jutland University Centre. In 2006 it was decided to incorporate the Business School Centre in Slagelse (Handelshøjskolecentret Slagelse) and the National Institute of Public Health (Statens Institut for Folkesundhed) into the University of Southern Denmark per January 1, 2007. The University therefore now has six campuses, mainly located in the southern part of Denmark: campus Odense on the island of Funen, campus Slagelse and campus Copenhagen on the island of Zealand, as well as campus Kolding, campus Esbjerg and campus Sønderborg (campus named Alsion) on the Jutland peninsula. In 1998 University Library of Southern Denmark was also merged with the university. [ Administration and Organization ] The university is governed by a board consisting of 9 members: 5 members recruited outside the university form the majority of the board, 1 member is appointed by the scientific staff, 1 member is appointed by the administrative staff, and 2 members are appointed by the university students. The Rector is appointed by the university board. The rector in turn appoints deans and deans appoint heads of departments. There is no faculty senate and faculty is not involved in the appointment of rector, deans, or department heads. Hence the university has no faculty governance. [ http://www.sdu.dk/Om_SDU/Organisationen/Bestyrelsen.aspx Syddansk Universitets bestyrelse 2009-11-20 ] [ Faculties, research, and teaching ] As a national institution the University of Southern Denmark (SDU) comprises five faculties – Humanities, Science, Engineering, Social Sciences and Health Sciences totaling 32 departments, 11 research centers and a university library. University Library of Southern Denmark is also a part of the university. Research activities and student education make up the core activities of the University. The University of Southern Denmark also has widespread cooperation with business and industry in the region and considerable activities within continuing education. The university offers a number of degrees taught in English; examples include European Studies and American Studies. The faculty of all six campuses comprises approximately 1,200 researchers in Odense, Kolding, Esbjerg, Sønderborg, Slagelse and Copenhagen; approximately 18,000 students are enrolled. The University of Southern Denmark offers programmes in five different faculties - Humanities, Science, Engineering, Social Sciences, and Health Sciences. It incorporates approximately 35 institutes, 30 research centres, and a well-equipped university library. The physical buildings of SDU cover an area of 272,554 m 2 (2007), a figure that has increased from 181,450 m 2 in 1999 when the university merger was effectuated. { Statistical Yearbook of the University of southern Denmark } The University offers a wide range of traditional disciplines as well as a broad selection of business and engineering studies. In recent years the number of options available has been considerably expanded. Examples include the introduction of a very successful Journalism programme in Odense, Information Science in Kolding, and a Mechatronics Engineering programme in Sønderborg. The educational environments on the Jutland campuses have also been strengthened through the creation of new programmes such as a bachelor&apos;s degree in Sociology and Cultural Analysis, a bachelor&apos;s degree Business Administration with Sports Management, a bachelor&apos;s and Public Health Science in Esbjerg, Danish and English Language Studies in Kolding, and a variety of engineering programmes and European Studies in Sønderborg. Moreover, the University of Southern Denmark is the only university in Scandinavia that offers a degree programme in chiropractic studies (Clinical Biomechanics). The University focuses on areas such as communication, information technology, and biotechnology. Other areas of research is pursued through a number of national research centres at the University of Southern Denmark. Examples include The Hans Christian Andersen Center, the Centre for Sound Communication, and the Danish Biotechnology Instrument Centre. Odense in particular focuses on research within the field of geriatrics. Co-operation with the business community has resulted in three substantial donations from some of the giants in Danish industry: Odense is the home of the Maersk Mc-Kinney Moller Institute for Production Technology, where robot technology is one of the many research areas. The Mads Clausen Institute in Sønderborg is engaged in the design and development of software for integration in intelligent products of the future. Thanks to funding from Kompan and Lego, a research environment for the investigation of child behaviour and development has also been established Princess Marie took over the role of the patron of the University in 2009. Odense Campus also known as The Rusty Castle New Sønderborg Campus, Alsion [ See also ] Odense University [ References ] [ External links ] [ University of Southern Denmark ] University of Southern Denmark University Library of Southern Denmark Alsion, The new campus building in Sønderborg Ivkstudiet.dk, International business communication site. [ 55 22 7 N 10 25 41 E type:edu_region:DK title ] Southern Denmark Category:Esbjerg University, of Southern Denmark Category:Educational institutions established in 1998 ar:جامعة جنوب الدنمارك da:Syddansk Universitet de:Syddansk Universitet fr:Université du Danemark du Sud no:Syddansk Universitet sv:Syddansk Universitet tr:Güney Danimarka Üniversitesi