[ Grays Grays Town Wharf.jpeg Grays wharf overlooking the Thames estuary Thurrock Essex East of England England 51.4724 0.3247 36,601 ( 2001 Census ) Thurrock GRAYS RM RM17 RM16 01375 TQ615773 ] Grays (or Grays Thurrock) [ Esssex AR Hope Moncrief L Burleigh Bruhl Adam and Charles Black 1909 107 ] is the largest town in the borough and unitary authority of Thurrock in Essex and one of the Thurrock&apos;s traditional (Church of England) parishes. It is situated approximately 20 miles (32  km) to the east of London on the north bank of the River Thames, and near the M25 motorway. [ History ] Parts of Grays and Chafford Hundred are set within three Victorian chalk pits; the largest two being the Lion Gorge, and the Warren Gorge. Another area of the Chafford Hundred residential development is built on a Victorian landfill site. [ Origin of the name ] Thurrock is a Saxon name meaning &quot; the bottom of a ship &quot;. { PH Reaney, The Place-Names of Essex, (CUP, 1969) } The element &quot; Grays &quot; comes from Henry de Grai, a descendant of the Norman knight Anchetil de Greye, who was granted the manor of Grays Thurrock 1195 by Richard I. [ Geography ] Nearest places: Aveley Chadwell St Mary Chafford Hundred North Stifford Orsett Purfleet South Ockendon South Stifford Tilbury West Thurrock Basildon [ Landmarks ] A map of the town from 1946 Local sites of interest include the Thameside Theatre, the Thurrock History Museum, Grays Beach and the now-disused State Cinema (which was used as a location in the film Who Framed Roger Rabbit and for sections of Jamiroquai &apos;s video of &quot; Deeper Underground &quot; for the film Godzilla ). From the top of the Derby Road Bridge in Grays you can look down to Thurrock Yacht Club, Grays Beach children&apos;s playground and the River Thames where you can occasionally see large ships travelling up and down. As well as Thurrock Yacht Club, Grays Beach is the site of the local landmark The Gull, a lightship built in 1860, which has lain on the foreshore for decades and is now in a serious state of dilapidation. [ Transport ] Grays has good road links, being close to the A13 road and the M25 motorway. London Road is the main road which links Grays town centre with Lakeside Shopping Centre and Purfleet. The local railway station is Grays railway station, which is served by c2c and runs between Fenchurch Street station in the City of London to the west and Shoeburyness to the east. Also Grays bus station at Grays railway station is a hub for most bus services in Thurrock. The bus services are operated by Ensignbus, First Essex, Arriva Southend, Imperial Buses and Regal Busways. [ Sports ] The area&apos;s local football team are Grays Athletic, who play non-League football and have won the FA Trophy on two occasions. Lakeside Hammers speedway team (formerly Arena Essex Hammers ) races nearby, next to the Lakeside Shopping Centre. [ Notable people ] Stuart Barnes Russell Brand Chris Cohen Danny Crates Mick Jackson Martin Litton Joe Pasquale Alfred Russel Wallace who lived at the Dell, College Avenue Sara Flower Phil Davis [ References ] [ External links ] Bygone Grays Thurrock - Local history website Thurrock Local History Society Grays Category:Thurrock Category:Towns in Essex Category:Populated places in Thurrock on the River Thames Category:Port of London de:Grays fr:Grays (Essex) it:Grays nl:Grays no:Grays nn:Grays pl:Grays ro:Grays simple:Grays vo:Grays