[ October 2010 ] [ United States National Security Council Seal Of The President Of The Unites States Of America.svg 140px 1947 President of the United States, Chairman Barack Obama Vice President of the United States Joe Biden Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton United States Secretary of Defense Leon Panetta National Security Advisor Tom Donilon Executive Office of the President of the United States ] President Barack Obama at a NSC Meeting in the Situation Room. Participants include Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton, Defense Secretary Robert Gates, Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Gen. James Cartwright, DNI Dennis Blair, White House Counsel Greg Craig, CIA Director Leon Panetta, Deputy National Security Adviser Tom Donilon, NSC Advisor Gen. James &quot; Jim &quot; Jones, and Chief of Staff Rahm Emanuel The White House National Security Council (NSC) in the United States is the principal forum used by the President of the United States for considering national security and foreign policy matters with his senior national security advisor s and Cabinet officials and is part of the Executive Office of the President of the United States. Since its inception under Harry S. Truman, the function of the Council has been to advise and assist the president on national security and foreign policies. The Council also serves as the president&apos;s principal arm for coordinating these policies among various government agencies. The U.S. Council has counterparts in the national security council s of many other nations. [ History ] The National Security Council was created in 1947 by the National Security Act. It was created because policymakers felt that the diplomacy of the State Department was no longer adequate to contain the USSR in light of the tension between the Soviet Union and the United States. { Encyclopedia of American foreign policy, 2nd ed. Vol. 2, New York: Scribner, 2002, National Security Council, 22 April 2009 } The intent was to ensure coordination and concurrence among the Navy, Marine Corps, Army, Air Force and other instruments of national security policy (such as the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), also created in the National Security Act). On May 26, 2009, President Barack Obama merged the White House staff supporting the Homeland Security Council (HSC) and the National Security Council into one National Security Staff (NSS). The HSC and NSC each continue to exist by statute as bodies supporting the president. { In Security Shuffle, White House Merges Staffs } The decision process inside the structure has become less and less formal, but influence of the Council has become stronger and stronger. Detailed history of the National Security Council under each Presidential administration since its inception can be found at: 1947–1953 1953–1961 1961–1963 1963–1969 1969–1974 1974–1977 1977–1981 1981–1989 1989–1992 1993–present [ Membership ] The National Security Council is chaired by the President. Its regular attendees (both statutory and non-statutory) are the Vice President (statutory), the Secretary of State (statutory), the Secretary of Treasury (non-statutory), the Secretary of Defense (statutory), and the National Security Advisor (non-statutory). The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff is the statutory military advisor to the Council, the Director of National Intelligence is the statutory intelligence advisor, and the Director of National Drug Control Policy is the statutory drug control policy advisor. The Chief of Staff to the President, Counsel to the President, and the Assistant to the President for Economic Policy are also invited to attend any NSC meeting. The Attorney General and the Director of the Office of Management and Budget are invited to attend meetings pertaining to their responsibilities. The heads of other executive departments and agencies, as well as other senior officials, are invited to attend meetings of the NSC when appropriate. [ National Security Council http://www.whitehouse.gov/administration/eop/nsc The White House www.whitehouse.gov 4 April 2012 ] Structure of the United States National Security Council (Current) Policy Directive 1 (PDD-1), White House, Feb 13, 2009 Chair Barack Obama ( President of the United States ) Statutory Attendees Joe Biden ( Vice President of the United States ) Hillary Clinton ( Secretary of State ) Leon Panetta ( Secretary of Defense ) Military Advisor Gen. Martin Dempsey ( US Army ) ( Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff ) Intelligence Advisor Lt. Gen. James R. Clapper (Ret.) ( Director of National Intelligence ) Drug Policy Advisor Gil Kerlikowske ( Director of National Drug Control Policy ) Regular Attendees Tom Donilon ( National Security Advisor ) Jacob Lew ( White House Chief of Staff ) Denis McDonough ( Deputy National Security Advisor ) Additional Participants Tim Geithner ( Secretary of the Treasury ) Eric Holder ( Attorney General ) Janet Napolitano ( Secretary of Homeland Security ) Pete Rouse ( Counselor to the President ) Gene Sperling ( Assistant to the President for Economic Policy ) Susan Rice ( Ambassador to the United Nations ) Jacob Lew ( Director of Office of Management and Budget ) Gen. David Petraeus (Ret.) ( Director of the Central Intelligence Agency ) John O. Brennan ( Homeland Security Advisor ) [ Staff ] [ section May 2011 ] Deputy Assistant to the President for Homeland Security : Heidi E. Avery { Assistant to the President and } { Deputy National Security Advisor : } { Denis McDonough } Spokesman : Mike Hammer { Deputy Assistant to the President, } { Deputy White House Counsel and } { Legal Advisor to the National Security Council : } { Mary DeRosa } { Deputy National Security Advisor for International Economic Affairs : } { Michael Froman } { Deputy Assistant to the President and } { National Security Council Chief of Staff and Counselor: } { Brooke D. Anderson } Special Assistant to the President and Executive Secretary of the National Security Council : Nate Tibbits Special Assistant to the President and Senior Director for Strategic Planning and Institutional Reform : Derek Chollet Special Assistant to the President, Deputy National Security Advisor for Iraq and Afghanistan : Lt. Gen. Douglas Lute Special Assistant to the President and White House Coordinator for Arms Control and WMD, Proliferation and Terrorism : Gary Samore Special Assistant to the President and Senior Director for Multilateral Affairs : Samantha Power Special Assistant to the President and Senior Director for Global Development, Stabilization and Humanitarian Assistance : Gayle Smith Special Assistant to the President and Cybersecurity Coordinator Howard Schmidt Special Assistant to the President and Senior Director for Non-Proliferation : Dan Poneman Special Assistant to the President and Senior Director for Defense : Christine Wormuth Special Assistant to the President and Senior Director for Intelligence Programs : Mike Epperson Special Assistant to the President and Senior Director for Counterterrorism : Nick Rasmussen Special Assistant to the President and Senior Director for Western Hemisphere Affairs : Dan Restrepo Special Assistant to the President and Senior Director for Europe : Elizabeth Sherwood-Randall Special Assistant to the President and Senior Director for Russia and Eurasian Affairs : Michael McFaul Special Assistant to the President and Senior Director for the Central Region : Dennis Ross Special Assistant to the President and Senior Director for Near East and North Africa : Daniel B. Shapiro Special Assistant to the President and Senior Director for Africa : Michelle Gavin Special Assistant to the President and Senior Director for the Gulf States, Iran and Iraq : Puneet Talwar Special Assistant to the President and Senior Director for South Asia : Anish Goel Special Assistant to the President and Senior Director for Asia : Jeffrey Bader Senior Director for Global Engagement : Pradeep Ramamurthy [ Authority ] The National Security Council was established by the National Security Act of 1947 (PL 235 – 61 Stat. 496; U.S.C. 402), amended by the National Security Act Amendments of 1949 (63 Stat. 579; 50 U.S.C. 401 et seq.). Later in 1949, as part of the Reorganization Plan, the Council was placed in the Executive Office of the President. [ High Value Detainee Interrogation Group ] The High Value Detainee Interrogation Group reports to the NSC. { &quot; Elite High Value Interrogation Unit Is Taking Its First Painful Steps &quot;, by Ed Barnes, [[Fox News Channel ], May 12, 2010] } [ Kill Authorizations ] A subset of the NSC may authorize US citizens to be killed. The members of the group that make the decision to kill are unknown, as are the rules which govern their decisions or the laws under which they operate. It is also unknown, outside of Anwar al-Awlaki, who has been placed on the kill list. There is no public record of its existence or its operations. The precise role the president plays in ordering or ratifying a decision to target a citizen is uncertain. { http://www.reuters.com/article/2011/10/05/us-cia-killlist-idUSTRE79475C20111005 } [ See also ] National Coordinator for Security, Infrastructure Protection and Counter-Terrorism National Security Medal Iran Contra Targeted killing Tower Commission [ References ] NSC page at the White House website Story on the NSC in Foreign Policy journal. Annual Report To Congress On White House Office Staff; [[Executive Office of the President ], Wednesday, July 1, 2009] [ Further reading ] Ivo H. Daalder and I.M. Destler, &apos;&apos;In the Shadow of the Oval Office: Profiles of the National Security Advisers and the Presidents They Served—From JFK to George W. Bush &apos;&apos; Simon &amp; Schuster; 2009, ISBN 978-1-4165-5319-9. Karl F. Inderfurth and Loch K. Johnson, eds. Fateful Decisions: Inside the National Security Council. Oxford University Press, 2004. ISBN 978-0-19-515966-0. David J. Rothkopf, Running The World: the Inside Story of the National Security Council and the Architects of American Power, PublicAffairs; 2006, ISBN 978-1-58648-423-1. Journey to the Center of the World: U.S. National Security Council – Arzın Merkezine Seyahat: ABD Ulusal Güvenlik Konseyi – Article on US NSC in Turkish Cody M. Brown, &apos;&apos;The National Security Council: A Legal History of the President&apos;s Most Powerful Advisers&apos;&apos;, Project on National Security Reform (2008). M. Kent Bolton, U.S. National Security and Foreign Policymaking after 9/11: Present at the Re-Creation, Rowman &amp; Littlefield; 2007, ISBN 978-0-7425-4847-3. [ External links ] [ National Security Council ] Official National Security Council website Records of the National Security Council (NSC) in the National Archives White House Office, National Security Council Staff Papers, 1948–1961, Dwight D. Eisenhower Presidential Library Homeland Security Watch (www.HLSwatch.com) provides current details on the NSC as it pertains to homeland security. Category:Anti-communism in the United States Category:Executive Office of the President of the United States Category:United States National Security Council Category:National security councils Category:1947 establishments in the United States [ fr ] ar:مجلس الأمن القومي الأمريكي da:USA&apos;s nationale sikkerhedsråd de:Nationaler Sicherheitsrat der Vereinigten Staaten el:Συμβούλιο Εθνικής Ασφαλείας των ΗΠΑ es:Consejo de Seguridad Nacional de los Estados Unidos fa:شورای امنیت ملی ایالات متحده آمریکا fr:Conseil de sécurité nationale (États-Unis) ko:미국 국가안전보장회의 it:Consiglio per la Sicurezza Nazionale he:המועצה לביטחון לאומי של ארצות הברית nl:Nationale Veiligheidsraad ja:アメリカ国家安全保障会議 no:Nasjonalt sikkerhetsråd (USA) pl:Rada Bezpieczeństwa Narodowego (Stany Zjednoczone) pt:Conselho de Segurança Nacional (Estados Unidos) ru:Совет национальной безопасности США simple:United States National Security Council sv:USA:s nationella säkerhetsråd vi:Hội đồng An ninh Quốc gia Hoa Kỳ