[ Passchendaele (disambiguation) ] [ May 2011 ] [ 50 54 1 N 3 1 16 E type:city Passendale inline,title ] { Passendale, Belgium } { Tactical Allied victory Operational Allied failure Strategically inconclusive } [ United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland ] { * } [ Australia ] { * } [ Newfoundland ] { * } [ Canada 1868 ] { * } [ British Raj ] { * } [ New Zealand ] { * } [ Union of South Africa 1912 ] [ France ] { France } [ Kingdom of Belgium ] [ German Empire ] [ United Kingdom ] { Douglas Haig } [ United Kingdom ] { Hubert Gough } [ United Kingdom ] { Herbert Plumer } [ Canada 1868 ] { Arthur Currie } [ Australia ] { John Monash } [ France ] { François Anthoine } [ German Empire ] { Erich Ludendorff } [ German Empire ] { Crown Prince Rupprecht of Bavaria } [ German Empire ] { Friedrich Sixt von Armin } { Disputed 200,000 – 448,614 } { Disputed 217,000 – 400,000 } The Battle of Passchendaele [ ˈ p æ ʃ ən d eɪ l ] { is the most common name for the campaign in English. Third Battle of Ypreswas the name adopted by the British Official History of the First World War. The German history uses the term Third Flanders Battle( } [ Dritte Flandernschlacht ] { ), while the French term is Second Battle of Flanders( } [ 2ème Bataille des Flandres ] { ) } { &quot; Note &quot; } was a campaign of the First World War, taking place between July and November 1917. In a series of operations, Entente armies under British command attacked the Imperial German Army. [ Entente forces included British, Canadian, South African, French and ANZAC units &quot; Note &quot; ] The battles were fought for control of the ridge and village of Passchendaele (modern Passendale) near the city of Ypres in West Flanders, Belgium. The British intention was to wear out the German army with a quick succession of broad-front attacks moving short distances into the German defences, eventually to force the German army into a general withdrawal, { Griffith, P, Battle Tactics of the Western Front, p. 87. } then to advance on the Belgian coast and connect with the Dutch frontier. The British commander Field Marshal Sir Douglas Haig anticipated a campaign in three parts: the capture of Passchendaele Ridge, an advance on Roulers and then Operation Hush, an attack along the Belgian coast from Nieuport combined with an amphibious landing. { Sheffield G. The Chief, p. 227, 2011 } The offensive also served to distract the German army from the French armies on the Aisne, which were debilitated by mutinies in the aftermath of the Nivelle Offensive. { Prior &amp; Wilson, Passchendaele, The Untold Story, p. 50. } The German Army fought to contain the British attacks using large amounts of artillery fire and many infantry counter-attacks, trying to keep control of the higher ground around Ypres which they had held since 1915. Much of the fighting took place in unusually wet weather, which turned parts of the battlefield into a sea of mud churned by shell-fire { Vandiver, E. &quot; Haig and Passchendaele &quot; in Liddle (ed), Passchndaele in Perspective, p. 39. } yet at other times, particularly in September, the weather was hot and dry enough for men to wear shorts. { Richardson, M. Weapons and Equipment.... in Liddle (ed), Passchendaele in Perspective, p. 343. } The campaign ended in November when the British army captured Passchendaele village and part of the ridge. The British advance beyond the ridge to Roulers and the linked coastal operation did not take place and the German army managed to avoid a general withdrawal, which had seemed inevitable to them in October. { Der Weltkrieg in Terraine, J. The Road...., p. 299. } The campaign is controversial; in a German General Staff publication of 1927 Theodor Jochim, first head of the Reichsarchivs documents section { Humphries and Maker, German OH 1915, (2010) foreword, xv. } wrote: &quot; Germany had been brought near to certain destruction (sicheren untergang) by the Flanders battle of 1917. &quot; { Edmonds, J. OH 1917 II, xiii quoting Die vorbereitung des deutschen Heeres fur die Grosse Schlacht in Frankreich im Fruhjahr 1918. (1927) Theodor Jochim. } in contrast, in his memoirs of 1938 Lloyd George wrote, &quot; Passchendaele was indeed one of the greatest disasters of the war.... No soldier of any intelligence now defends this senseless campaign.... &quot;. { Lloyd George, War Memoirs (1938) in Terraine, J. The Road...., pp. XIX-XX. } In 2008 J. P. Harris condemned Haig and the offensive, &quot; For the troops taking part, however, some phases of Third Ypres had a quality more nightmarish than anything previously experienced. &quot; { Harris, J.P. Douglas Haig...., p.382. } In 2011 G. Sheffield claimed the opposite though, quoting General von Kuhl, who said &quot; The sacrifices that the British made for the Entente were fully justified. &quot; { Sheffield, G. The Chief...., p. 248. } [ Background ] The Treaty of London (1839) recognized Belgium as an independent and neutral state. { Albertini, L. The Origins of the War of 1914 (1952), vol iii, p. 414. } The German invasion of Belgium on 4 August 1914, in violation of article VII of the treaty led to Britain declaring war at midnight. { Albertini, L. The Origins of the War of 1914 (1952), vol iii, p. 504. } British military operations in Belgium began with the arrival of the British Expeditionary Force (BEF) at Mons on 22 August, its retreat on 24 August after the Battle of Mons and the dispatch of the Royal Naval Division to Dunkirk on 20 September 1914. On 3 October the Royal Marine Light Infantry Brigade of the division arrived at Antwerp. The Belgian army and part of the Royal Naval Division evacuated Antwerp in early October and retreated down the coast, the city being surrendered to the Germans on 10 October. On 16 October the Belgians with some French reinforcements began the defence of the French channel ports and what remained of unoccupied Belgium at the Battle of the Yser. Operations further south in Flanders commenced after attempts by the French and German armies to turn their opponents&apos; northern flank through Picardy, Artois and Flanders, (the &apos; Race to the Sea &apos;) reached Ypres. On 4 October Foch was appointed assistant Commander-in-Chief with responsibility for co-ordinating the activities of the northern French armies and liaising with British forces. Foch intended the Allied forces in Flanders to advance from Ypres—Nieuport to trap part of the German force opposite against the sea, then advance south east towards the Lys. { Edmonds, J. OH 1914 II, pp. 126–128. } In the event, French and British forces arriving in Flanders had to be used piecemeal to stop the German attack in the opposite direction. Lieutenant-General von Falkenhayn, Chief of the General Staff since replacing Colonel-General von Moltke on 14 September 1914, added Beseler &apos;s 3rd Reserve Corps from Antwerp and four reserve corps of wartime volunteers to the 4th Army. On 10 October Falkenhayn ordered it to &apos;... advance without regard for casualties, with its right wing resting on the coast, first on the fortresses of Dunkirk and Calais... then to swing south... at St Omer.&apos; to deal the Entente an annihilating blow.&apos; { Foley, R.T. German Strategy and the Path to Verdun (2007) p. 102. } The attempt to win a &apos;decisive&apos; battle failed so Falkenhayn ordered the capture of Ypres to gain a local advantage. By 12 November Falkenhayn accepted that the First Battle of Ypres had failed (at a cost of 160,000 German casualties) and stopped the offensive on 18 November. { Foley, R.T. German Strategy and the Path to Verdun (2007), p. 104, fn 1. } In December 1914 the Admiralty began discussions with the War Office about a combined operation to occupy the Belgian coast to the Dutch fronter; an attack up the coast was to be combined with a landing at Ostend. General Joffre the French Commander-in-Chief opposed the scheme in favour of operations around Arras, { Humphries and Marker, Ger OH 1915, p. 46. } in what became the First Battle of Artois and the First Battle of Champagne. { Edmonds, J. OH 1917 II, p. 2. } Large British offensive operations in Flanders were not possible later in 1915, due to shortages of everything { Doughty, R.A. Pyrrhic Victory (2005), p. 137. } and the need to conform to Joffre&apos;s strategy of attacking the Noyon Salient, by relieving French troops in the Ypres salient with the Second Army and by operating further south at the northern shoulder of the salient with the First Army, at Neuve Chapelle 10—13 March 1915, Aubers Ridge 9 May 1915, Festubert 15—27 May 1915 and Loos 25 September—14 October 1915 (a small diversion at Hooge and Bellewaarde by V Corps was undertaken on the opening day) as part of the Third Battle of Artois and the Second Battle of Champagne (at the southern end of the Noyon Salient) { Edmonds, J. OH 1915 II (1928), pp. 263–264. } and because of the diversion of resources to the Gallipoli Campaign { Aspinall-Oglander, OH Gallipoli I, pp. 49–64. } in the eastern Mediterranean. { Doughty, R.A. Pyrrhic Victory (2005), pp. 137–140. } In the event it was the Germans who conducted a Flanders offensive at Ypres (22 April—15 May 1915), &apos;... making what was already a none too tenable position even more unsatisfactory and costly to defend&apos;. { Edmonds, J. OH 1916 I (1932), p. 1. } The vulnerability of troops in the salient was shown by the first German gas attack with Phosgene on 19 December, which caused 1,069 casualties (120 fatal). German attempts to probe the British defences were stopped as the British had been alerted by a prisoner captured 4/5 December and because a brisk wind blew the gas beyond the British front line too fast for it to seriously affect many soldiers. { Edmonds, J. OH 1916 I, pp.158–162. } Small operations took place in the Salient in 1916, some being German initiatives to distract the Allies from the preparations for the offensive at Verdun and later to try to divert Allied attention from the Battle of the Somme and others were begun by the British to regain territory or to evict the Germans from ground overlooking their positions. Engagements took place on 12 February at Boesinge and on 14 February at Hooge and Sanctuary Wood. There were actions on 14—15 February and 1—4 March at The Bluff, 27 March—16 April at the St Eloi Craters and the battle of Mount Sorrel 2—13 June. { Edmonds, J. OH 1916 I, pp. 163–245. } In January 1917 the Second Army (II Anzac, IX, X and VIII corps) held the line in Flanders from Laventie to Boesinghe with 11 divisions and up to two in reserve. There was much trench mortaring, mining and raiding by both sides and from January to May the Second Army had 20,000 casualties. In May reinforcements began moving to Flanders from the south, II Corps and 17 divisions had arrived by the end of the month. { Falls, C. OH 1917 I p. 533-534. } [ Prelude ] In October 1915 the Admiralty tried to revive the scheme as German U-boats based in Belgian ports were an increasing threat to the supply of British forces in France. The battleship HMS Formidable had been sunk by SM U-24 on 1 January 1915 and the Germans had begun unrestricted submarine warfare in February 1915 (until April 1916). 855,721 tons of British shipping was sunk out of a world total of 1,307,996 tons lost over the year. { Terraine pp. 3, 17–24. } (In February 1917 the Germans resumed unrestricted submarine warfare and sank 6,235,878 tons of shipping that year, 3,729,785 tons of it British.) { Terraine, J. Business... p. 766. } A memorandum of 12 November 1915 by the War Office, Admiralty and the commander of the Dover Patrol recommended an advance along the coast to Ostend with a diversion elsewhere (possibly Ypres) to draw off German reserves. If the advance reached Westende Plage, a landing might be possible at Middelkerke Bains. With Ostend occupied, long-range artillery could bombard Zeebrugge. { Edmonds, J. OH 1917 II, p. 396-397. } Sir Douglas Haig succeeded Sir John French as Commander-in-Chief of the BEF on 19 December 1915 { Terraine, J. The Road to Passchendaele (1977), pp. 12–13. } and a week after his appointment Haig met Vice-Admiral Sir Reginald Bacon who emphasised the importance of obtaining control of the Belgian coast to end the threat from German naval forces based there. Haig was sceptical of a coast operation, believing that a landing from the sea would be far more difficult than anticipated and that an advance along the coast would require so much preparation that the Germans would have ample warning. Haig preferred an advance from Ypres to bypass the flooded area around the Yser and the coast before a coastal attack was attempted, with the intention of clearing the coast to the Dutch border. { Edmonds, J. OH 1916 I, p. 2. } On 14 January 1916 Haig ordered General Plumer to plan offensives against Messines Ridge, Lille and Houthoulst Forest. { Edmonds, J. OH 1916 I, p.31. } General Rawlinson was also ordered to plan an attack from the Ypres Salient on 4 February. { Terraine p. 14. } Planning by Plumer continued but the effect of the Battle of Verdun on the French army, beginning in February 1916 and the demands of the Somme battles later in the year absorbed the BEF&apos;s offensive capacity. { Terraine p. 15. } On 7 July Haig accepted that large operations in Flanders could not be conducted in 1916. { Edmonds, J. OH 1917 II, p. 33. } On 15 and 29 November 1916, as the Battle of the Somme paused during the wet weather, Sir Douglas Haig met Général d&apos;Armée Joffre and the other Allies at Chantilly who agreed on an offensive strategy to overwhelm the Central Powers with attacks on the Western, Eastern and Italian Fronts by the first fortnight in February. { Hart &amp; Steel p. 30. } The French and British Commanders-in-Chief agreed to continue the operations in progress, (weather permitting) and in concert with the Russians and Italians, resume the Somme offensive in February on a broader front of about 50 miles, the British between the Somme and Arras with the French army between the Somme and Oise. { Falls, C. OH 1917 I, p. 9-10. } Fifteen days after the opening of the offensive the French Fifth Army would begin a surprise attack between Soissons and Reims. { Doughty, R. A. Pyrrhic Victory (2005) p. 315. } A Flanders operation was not discussed at the conference but after a meeting on 22 November 1916 in London of Sir Douglas Haig, Sir William Robertson Chief of the Imperial General Staff, Admiral Sir Henry Jackson First Sea Lord, Vice-Admiral Sir Reginald Bacon commander of the Dover Patrol and others, it was decided to write to General Joffre urging that the Flanders operation be undertaken in 1917; Joffre replied on 8 December agreeing to the proposal for a Flanders campaign after the spring offensive. { Falls, C. OH 1917 I, p. 21. } On 13 December Joffre was appointed &quot; technical adviser &quot; to the government by the French Prime Minister Aristide Briand and General Nivelle became Commander-in-Chief of the armies of the North and North-East; Joffre resigned on 26 December. { Terraine, J. The Road...., p. 19. } Nivelle&apos;s cheap victories at Verdun on 24 October and 15 December 1916 had left France&apos;s political leaders confident in their offensive strategy but with no faith in Joffre and his costly battle of the Somme. { Doughty, R. A. Pyrrhic Victory (2005) p. 310. } The plan for a year of steady attrition on the Western Front, with the main effort in the summer being made by the British Expeditionary Force, was scrapped by Nivelle and the French government for a decisive battle, to be conducted in February by the French army, with the British army&apos;s contribution becoming a preliminary operation, which became the Battles of Arras. { Falls, C. OH 1917 I, pp. 38–39. } Nivelle believed that an attack by French forces on the Western Front using the methods of Verdun, where a huge amount of long-range heavy artillery had devastated zones through the depth of the German defences, opening routes for the French infantry, could bring a decisive victory. Instead of methodical attacks and pauses which allowed both sides to recover, Nivelle wanted continuous attacks which would move fast enough to reach the enemy&apos;s heavy artillery in 24–48 hours, then make an &quot; audacious lateral exploitation &quot; which would allow reserve forces through the gap to destroy the German army&apos;s reserves in open warfare. &quot; Objective: total destruction of active enemy forces by manoeuvre and battle &quot;. (Nivelle). { Doughty, R. A. Pyrrhic Victory (2005), p. 324. } In London, Asquith resigned on 5 December 1916 and Lloyd George became Prime Minister. At the Rome conference 5—7 January 1917 he tried to interest Briand and the other Allied leaders in an offensive in Italy. Lloyd George&apos;s proposal was referred to their military advisors, who promptly killed the idea. Nivelle&apos;s plan was welcomed by Haig with reservations, which he addressed on 6 January. After repeated insistence on Haig&apos;s part, Nivelle agreed a proviso that if the first two &quot; phases &quot; of the operations – preliminary offensives to pin German reserves by the British at Arras and the French between the Somme and the Oise (the latter was cancelled because of the Germans withdrawal to the Hindenburg Line, beginning from the front north of the Somme on 22 February and the rest of the Noyon Salient on 16 March in Operation Alberich ), followed by a French breakthrough offensive on the Aisne – failed to lead to &quot; phase three &quot;, pursuit and exploitation, they would be stopped so that the British could &quot; transfer (their) main forces to the north &quot; for the Flanders offensive, which Haig argued was of great importance to the British government. { Terraine, J. The Road to Passchendaele, p. 30. } { Letter OAD 262, (Haig to Nivelle) 6 January 1917, in OH 1917 I, Appendices, p. 14. } At meetings in France and then in London 15—16 January, Lloyd George was convinced by Nivelle of the virtues of his plan, not least because it might lead to less of the burden of the war in 1917 falling on the British, although delays meant that the offensive could not begin until April. At Lloyd George&apos;s prompting, Nivelle proposed that Haig be placed under his direct command. This was regarded as an insult by the British generals, and after angry discussions it was agreed on 27 January that Haig would be under the command of Nivelle only for the duration of the operation. Haig wrote on 23 January that it would take six weeks to move British troops and equipment from the Arras front to Flanders and on 14 March he noted that the attack on Messines Ridge could be made in May. On 21 March he wrote to Nivelle that it would take two months to prepare the attacks from Messines to Steenstraat but that the Messines attack could be ready in 5–6 weeks. On 16 May Haig wrote that he had divided the Flanders operation into two phases, one to take Messines Ridge and the main attack several weeks later. { Terraine, J. The Road to Passchendaele, pp. 32, 55 &amp; 94. } British determination to clear the Belgian coast took on more urgency after the Germans resumed unrestricted submarine warfare on 1 February, { Terraine, J. Business in.... p. 15. } sinking 6,235,878 tons of shipping, 3,729,785 tons of it British in 1917. { Terraine, J. Business in.... p. 766. } The German decision also led to the USA declaring war on 6 April 1917. In the first half of 1917 the British army in France undertook the winter fighting on the Somme as agreed with Joffre in November 1916, where the Fifth Army attacked in the Ancre valley from 11 January—14 February and 17—18 February 1917, pushing the Germans back a considerable distance and exposing their defences further north. The British then pursued the German armies to the Hindenburg Line from 22 February, when German forces began a withdrawal from the Ancre, which by 17 March spread to all the front of the British Fifth Army and the southern part of the Third Army front further north; by 18 March the German 7th, 2nd, 1st and part of the 6th Army were withdrawing (on a front of 65 miles as the crow flies). The British then began the capture of the German outposts forward of the Hindenburg Line (before and during the offensive at Arras) and fought the Battle of Arras 9 April—24 May as the British contribution to the Nivelle Offensive. { Falls, C. OH 1917 I, p.543. } [ Geography and climate ] The progression of the battle and the general disposition of troops The front line around Ypres had changed relatively little since the end of the Second Battle of Ypres (22 April—25 May 1915). { Edmonds, J. OH 1915 I, p. 353. } The British held the city of Ypres, while the Germans held the high ground of the Messines-Wytschaete ridge to the south, the lower ridges to the east and the flat ground to the north. { Hart &amp; Steel pp. 18–19. } [ &apos;High ground&apos; is a relative term. Passchendaele is on a ridge about 70ft (25m) above the surrounding plains. The Gheluvelt Plateau is about 100ft (35m) above surrounding area. Wytschaete is about 150ft (50m) above the ground before it; these terrain features were vital for artillery observation. Terraine p. 2. &quot; Note &quot; ] Ypres was therefore in a salient sticking into German positions and overlooked by German artillery on the higher ground. It was difficult for the British forces to gain ground observation of the German rear areas east of the ridges. { Hart &amp; Steel p. 42. } Belgian geology is composed of Tertiary Eocene formations (65 million years old). In Flanders, sands, gravels and marls predominate; in places they are covered by silts (1 million years old). The coastal strip is sand but a short way inland the ground rises to the vale of Ypres, which before the war was a flourishing market garden. { Hussey, J. The Flanders Battleground and the Weather in 1917 p. 141 in: Liddle, P. (ed) Passchendaele in Perspective (1997) pp. 140–158. } Ypres is 22 miles inland, at 20m (66  feet) above sea level; Bixshoote four miles to the north is at 8.5m (30  feet). To the east the land is at 20-25m for several miles, with the Steenbeek stream at 15m (48  feet) near St Julien. There is a low ridge from Messines Ridge 80m (264  feet) at its highest point, running north east past &quot; Clapham Junction &quot; at the west end of Gheluvelt plateau (2 1/2 miles from Ypres at 65m [213 feet]) and Gheluvelt (above 50m) to Passchendaele, (5 1/2 miles from Ypres at 50m [165 feet] ) declining from there to a plain further north; gradients vary from negligible, to 1 in 60 at Hooge and 1 in 33 at Zonnebeke. { Hussey, J. The Flanders Battleground and the Weather in 1917 p. 141 in: Liddle, P. (ed) Passchendaele in Perspective (1997) } Underneath the soil is London clay, sand and silt; according to the Commonwealth War Graves Commission categories of: sand, sandy soils and well-balanced soils, Messines Ridge is well-balanced soil and the ground around Ypres is sandy soil. { Hussey, J. The Flanders Battleground and the Weather in 1917 p. 142 in: Liddle, P. (ed) Passchendaele in Perspective (1997) } The flat ground is drained by many streams, canals and ditches which need regular maintenance. Since 1914 much of the drainage had been destroyed, although some parts had been restored by Land Drainage Companies brought from England; the area was considered by the British to be drier than Loos, Givenchy and Plugstreet Wood further south. { Edmonds, j. OH 1917 II, p. 125. } Haig&apos;s biographer Brigadier General John Charteris, Chief of British Army Intelligence in France, wrote in 1929 that &quot; Careful investigation of the records of 80 years showed that in Flanders the weather broke early with the regularity of the Indian monsoon.... &quot; a claim that has influenced several historians. Winter { Winter, pp. 91–2. } takes the view that Haig had conclusive evidence that should have led him to expect heavy rainfall and hence mud. Stevenson, { Stevenson, D. 1914–1918...., p. 335. } Cruttwell { Cruttwell, C.R.M.F. A History...., p. 440. } and Steel &amp; Hart { Hart &amp; Steel pp. 140–141. } take the view that Haig was unlucky. Sheffield writes that the &quot; predictable &quot; rain in August &quot;... has no foundation in fact. The rain in Flanders during the battle was abnormally heavy. &quot;, { Sheffield, G. The Chief (2011) P. 233. } concurring with Terraine. { Terraine, J. The Road toPasschendaele, pp. 205–206. } The rest of Charteris&apos;s sentence is rarely quoted, &quot;... : once the autumn rains set in difficulties would be greatly enhanced. Unfortunately there now set in the wettest August recorded for thirty years. &quot; { Charteris, J. Field Marshal Earl Haig, (1929) pp. 272–273. } In 1958 Lieutenant-Colonel Ernest Gold, Commandant of the Meteorological Section at GHQ British Expeditionary Force contradicted the first part of Charteris&apos;s sentence, &quot; It is quite contrary to the evidence of the records which show that the weather in August 1917 was exceptionally bad... &quot;, { Gold, E. Letter to The Spectator 17 January 1958 in Hussey, J. The Flanders Battleground and the Weather in 1917 p. 153-154 in: Liddle, P. (ed) Passchendaele in Perspective (1997) } with five times the average August rainfall in 1915 and 1916 falling in 1917. { Terraine, J. OH 1917 II, pp. 205–206. } A 1989 study of weather data recorded from 1867—1916 at Lille, (16 miles from Ypres) showed that August was more often dry than wet, that there was a trend towards dry autumns (September—November) and that average rainfall in October had decreased over the previous 50 years. { Griffiths, P. The effects of weather conditions of the Third Battle of Ypres, 1917 (1989) in Hussey, J. The Flanders...., p. 147-148. } Rainfall in August 1917 was 127mm, of which 84mm fell on 1, 8, 14, 26 and 27 August, a month also dull and windless so that the water on the ground dried slowly. September had 40mm of rain and was much sunnier so the ground dried quickly, becoming hard enough in places for shells to ricochet and for dust to blow in the breeze. In October 107mm of rain fell, compared to the 1914—1916 average of 44mm and from 1—9 November there was 7.5mm of rain but only 9 hours of sunshine so little of the water dried; 13.4mm of rain fell on 10 November. { Hussey, J. The Flanders Battleground and the Weather in 1917 p. 149-151 in: Liddle, P. (ed) Passchendaele in Perspective (1997) } [ British planning for a Flanders campaign: 1916—1917 ] Preparations for operations in Flanders began in 1915 with the doubling of the Hazebrouck—Ypres rail line and the building of a new line Bergues—Proven which was doubled in early 1917. Progress on roads, rail lines, railheads and spurs in the Second Army zone was continuous and by mid-1917 gave the area the most efficient supply system of the British Expeditionary Force in France. { Henniker, A. M. Transportation on the Western Front, p. 273. } Several plans and memoranda for a Flanders offensive were produced between January 1916 and May 1917. On 7 January 1916 Sir Douglas Haig ordered General Rawlinson to work on a scheme for an advance from the Ypres Salient towards Houthoulst Forest. At a meeting between Haig and the British army commanders on 13 January, the vital importance of the capture of the Gheluvelt plateau to an advance beyond the Steenbeek was acknowledged. Plumer the commander of the Second Army which held the Ypres salient, described his plan to capture Messines Ridge and persuaded Haig that it should form part of the bigger plan to clear the Belgian coast. Rawlinson&apos;s plan was submitted on 27 February, leading to a GHQ memorandum of 5 March 1916. { Edmonds, OH 1917 II, p. 4. } On 10 April Plumer was required to produce a plan for an operation on 15 July but by mid-August it was clear that the unexpected duration of the Battle of the Somme meant that even the Messines attack was not feasible that year. { Edmonds, J. OH 1917 II, p. 6. } On 17 November Haig asked Plumer for a plan assuming the availability of 30—35 divisions, which Plumer delivered on 12 December 1916. Haig felt that the more ambitious French attempt at a decisive battle proposed by General Nivelle, would either force the Germans to abandon the Belgian coast if successful or if not, might well leave the German army &quot; disorganised and weak &quot; and thus vulnerable to a Flanders offensive which was faster in tempo than the 1916 Somme advance. { Instructions from &quot; Tavish &quot; Davidson in Terraine, J. The Road to Passchendaele, p. 27. } Dissatisfied with the limited scope of Plumer&apos;s initial plan for the capture of Messines Ridge and Pilckem Ridge, on 6 January 1917 Haig ordered him to produce a revised plan which Plumer presented on 30 January, in which the first stage of the operation would capture Messines Ridge and the Pilckem Ridge area north of the plateau to a depth of 2,000 yards, while also pushing some distance across the Gheluvelt plateau. Shortly afterwards there would be an attack across the plateau, advancing to Passchendaele and then beyond. { Edmonds, OH 1917 II, pp. 14–15. } Haig also asked for an assessment on 8 January 1917 from Colonel Macmullen on his GHQ staff, who on 14 February proposed that the plateau be taken by a mass tank attack, reducing the need for artillery; in April a reconnaissance by Captain G. le Q Martel found that the area was unsuitable for tanks, because narrow defiles between three woods obstructed the approaches and the broken state of the ground and woods on the high ground beyond the front line was impassable; the tanks would have to detour north of Bellewaarde lake to Westhoek then wheel right at the German Albrecht (second) Line. { Edmonds, J. OH 1917 II, p. 25, fn 1. } On 9 February General Rawlinson, commander of the Fourth Army, was asked to comment on Plumer&apos;s proposals of 30 January and suggested that Messines Ridge could be taken in one day and that the capture of the Gheluvelt plateau was essential for the attack further north. He suggested that the southern attack from St Yves to Mount Sorrel should be first and that Mount Sorrel to Steenstraat be attacked within 48–72 hours. { Edmonds, J. OH 1917 II, p. 17. } After discussions with Rawlinson and Plumer and the incorporation of Haig&apos;s changes, Macmullen submitted his memorandum on 14 February. With the addition of an amendment from General Plumer of 18 March and another from Haig on 3 April, the memorandum became the basis of Gough&apos;s plan for the 1917 Flanders campaign. { Edmonds, J. OH 1917 II, p. 18-19. } On 1 May 1917, Haig wrote, The enemy has already been weakened appreciably, but time is required to wear down his great numbers of troops. The situation is not yet ripe for the decisive blow. We must therefore continue to wear down the enemy until his power of resistance has been further reduced.... The cause of Gen. Nivelle&apos;s comparative failure appears primarily to have been a miscalculation in this respect, and the remedy now is to return to wearing-down methods for a further period, the duration of which cannot yet be calculated. I recommend that the pause which is forced upon us in vigorous offensive operations is utilised to complete measures for clearing the coast this summer. Success seems reasonably possible. Powell, G. Plumer The Soldiers&apos; General, p. 169. The guiding principles on which my general scheme of action is based are those which have proved successful in war from time immemorial, viz, that the first step must always be to wear down the enemy&apos;s power of resistance until he is so weakened that he will be unable to withstand a decisive blow; and, finally, to reap the fruits of victory.... The enemy has already been weakened appreciably; but a long time is required to wear down such great numbers of troops composed of fine fighting material... Our action must therefore continue for the present to be of a wearing-down character.... we shall be attacking the enemy on a front where he cannot refuse to fight, and where, therefore, our purpose of wearing him down can be given effect to – while even a partial success will considerably improve our defensive positions in the YPRES salient and thus reduce the heavy wastage which must otherwise be expected to occur there next winter as in the past. OAD 428, Haig to War Cabinet, 1 May 1917 in Terraine, J. The Road to Passchendaele, p. 84. Nivelle&apos;s operations had only managed a limited advance; the attempts at breakthrough had given way to wearing down attacks, so the period of Haig&apos;s subordination to the French army command had ended. After the agreement reached at the Inter-Allied Conference in Paris 4—5 May, Haig held a conference with his army commanders at Doullens where he set the timetable for his Flanders offensive, with 7 June the date for the preliminary attack on Messines Ridge. { Edmonds, J. OH 1917 II, p. 24. } A week after Messines Ridge was captured Haig gave his objectives to his Army commanders: wearing out the enemy, securing the Belgian coast and connecting with the Dutch frontier by the capture of Passchendaele Ridge, an advance on Roulers and Operation Hush, an attack along the coast with an amphibious landing. { Sheffield, G. The Chief, p. 227 } &quot; If effectives, or guns inadequate it may be necessary to call a halt after No1 is gained. &quot; (Haig: Diary 14 June) { Sheffield, G. The chief, p. 227 and endnote 15, p. 436. } Haig told General Gough of the Fifth Army that he would command of the &apos;northern operation&apos; and the coastal force on 30 April 1917. Haig put his views to the War Cabinet on 12 June when he wrote, &quot; With the drafts and guns already promised, however, I consider, on present indications, that it will be possible to carry through at least a portion of the operations intended.... &quot; { Edmonds,J. OH 1917 II, p. 424. } and that the extent of the success to be gained was dependent on War Cabinet priorities, the state of Russia and German staying power. On 21 June the principle of a Flanders offensive met with the grudging approval of Lloyd George { Sheffield, G. The Chief, Douglas Haig and the British Army (2011) p. 231. } and the approval of the British Cabinet. { Winter, Haig&apos;s Command, p. 78. } { Hart &amp; Steel p. 28. } [ German defences in Flanders: February—June 1917 ] German defensive preparations: June—July 1917 The Fourth Army had twenty-five miles of front to defend with three Groups, Dixmude (XIV Corps), Ypres (III Bavarian Corps) and Wytschaete (IX Reserve Corps); Group Staden ( Guards Reserve Corps ) was added later. Group Dixmude held twelve miles, with four front divisions and two Eingreif divisions; Group Ypres held six miles from Pilckem to Menin Road with three front divisions and two Eingreif divisions and Group Wytschaete held a similar length of front south of Menin Road with three front divisions and three Eingreif divisions. These Eingreif divisions were placed behind the Menin and Passchendaele Ridges. Five miles further back were four more Eingreif divisions and seven miles beyond them another two in Oberste Heeresleitung reserve. { Wynne, ibid, pp. 297–298. } German anxiety that the British would exploit their victory at Messines by advancing to the Bassevillebeek (Tower Hamlets) spur beyond the north end of Messines Ridge, led Crown Prince Rupprecht on 9 June to propose a withdrawal to the Flandern Line in the area east of Messines; construction of defences in the area began but on 13 June Colonel von Lossberg arrived as the new Chief of Staff of Fourth Army. { Wynne, G.C. If Germany Attacks...., pp. 282–283. } Lossberg rejected the proposed withdrawal to the Flandern Line and ordered that the current front line east of the Sehnen Line (Oosttaverne Line to the British) be held rigidly as the front of a deepened Flandern Stellung (position), in front of the Flandern Line which was to become Flandern I, with a new Flandern II line built west of Menin, north to Terhand and Passchendaele, at the back of a new Flandern II Stellung. The building of Flandern III was started east of Menin north to Moorslede. { Wynne, If Germany...., p. 284. } On 25 June Ludendorff suggested to Rupprecht that Group Ypres should withdraw to the Wilhelm (third) Line, leaving only outposts in the Albrecht (second) Line. On 30 June Rupprecht&apos;s Chief of Staff, General von Kuhl suggested a withdrawal to Flandern I along Passchendaele Ridge, meeting the old front line in the north near Langemarck and close to Armentieres in the south. Such a withdrawal would avoid a hasty retreat from Pilckem Ridge and also force the British into a time-consuming redeployment. Lossberg disagreed, believing that the British would launch a broad front offensive, that the ground east of the Sehnen Iine was easy to defend, that the Menin Road Ridge could be held if it was made the schwerpunkt (point of main effort) and that Pilckem Ridge deprived the British of ground observation over the Steenbeek Valley, while the Germans could see the area from Passchendaele Ridge, allowing German infantry to be supported by observed artillery fire. { Wynnne, If Germany...., pp. 286–287. } Lossberg&apos;s judgement was accepted and no withdrawal was made. The defence in depth began with a front system of three breastworks: Ia, Ib and Ic each about 200 yards apart, garrisoned by the four companies of each front battalion, with listening-posts in no-man&apos;s-land. About 2,000 yards behind these works was the Albrecht (&apos;second&apos; or &apos;artillery protective&apos;) Line, the rear boundary of the forward battlezone (Kampffeld). Companies of the support battalions, (25% Sicherheitsbesatzung (identified by white arm-bands) to hold the strong-points and 75% Stosstruppen to counter-attack towards them) were placed at the back of the Kampffeld, half in the pill-boxes of the Albrecht Line to provide a framework for the re-establishment of defence in depth once the enemy attack had been repulsed. { Wynne, If Germany...., p. 292. } Dispersed in front of the line were divisional Sharpshooter (Scharfschützen) machine-gun nests (the Stutzpunkt-Linie). The Albrecht Line also marked the front of the main battlezone (Grosskampffeld) about 2,000 yards deep, behind which was the Wilhelm (third) Line. This zone contained most of the field artillery of the front divisions. In pill-boxes of the Wilhelm Line were reserve battalions of the front-line regiments in divisional reserve. { Wynne, If Germany...., p.288. } From the Wilhem (third) Line to Flandern I was a rearward battlezone (rückwärtige Kampffeld) containing the support and reserve assembly areas for the Eingreif division s. The failures at Verdun in December 1916 and at Arras in April 1917 had given more importance to these areas, since the Kampffeld had been overrun and its garrisons lost. It was anticipated that the main defensive engagement would take place in the Grosskampffeld by the Eingreif divisions, against attackers who had been slowed and depleted by the forward garrisons before these were destroyed. &quot;... they will have done their duty so long as they compel the enemy to use up his supports, delay his entry into the position, and disorganise his waves of attack. &quot; (General Balcke) { Schwarte, Militarischen Lehren des grossen Krieges, p.52 in Wynne If Germany...., p. 289. } The leading regiment of an Eingreif (interlocking) division was to advance into the zone of the front division with its other two regiments moving forward in close support. The support and reserve assembly areas in the Flandern Stellung were termed Fredericus Rex Raum and Triarier Raum by analogy with the formation of a Roman legion ( hastati, principes and triarii ). Eingreif Divisions were accommodated 10,000 to 12,000 yards behind the front line and began their advance to their assembly areas in the rückwärtige Kampffeld, ready to intervene in the Grosskampffeld, { Wynne, If Germany...., p. 290. } for den sofortigen Gegenstoss (the instant-immediate counterthrust). { Samuels, M. Command or Control?, p. 193. } Lossberg rejected elastic defence in Flanders. There was little prospect of any delay being imposed on British attacks caused by their need to move artillery forward and build supply routes in an attack towards Flandern I, since the British had such a mass of artillery and the infrastructure necessary to supply it with huge amounts of ammunition, much of which had been built in the period between the attack at Messines and 31 July....the front line of sentry groups (Postengraben) is to be fought for at all costs. It is the line to be held in all circumstances with the certain assurance that an immediate counter-attack will be delivered to recapture any lost sector of it and to relieve the defenders. If a trench garrison retires in a zone of fire it quickly becomes disorganised; all experience proves that such troops can no longer be expected to carry out a counter-attack; the result is almost invariably the loss of the sector of the line evacuated and, as a further consequence, the creation of a very difficult situation for the troops on the flanks. (Lossberg, Erfahrungen der I Armee in der Sommeschlacht) Wynne, If Germany...., p. 291. The counter-attack was to be the main tactic against attacks on the front divisions; local withdrawals would only disorganise the troops moving forward to their assistance. Front line troops were not expected to cling to shelters, which were man traps but leave them as soon as the battle began, moving forward and to the flanks to avoid enemy fire and to counter-attack. German infantry equipment had recently been improved by the arrival of 36 MG08/15 (equivalent to the British Lewis Gun ) per regiment. The Trupp of eight men was augmented by a MG08/15 crew of four men to become a Gruppe, with the Trupp component renamed Stosstrupp, giving the German unit better means for fire and manoeuvre. 60% of the front line garrison were Stosstrupps, 40% were Stossgruppen based in the forward battlezone. Stoss-kompagnien occupied the Albrecht (second) Line (80%) and Stoss-batallione in divisional reserve (all being Stoss formations) and then the Eingreif division (all Stoss formations) arrayed in the Fredericus Rex and Triarii positions. The essence of all of these defensive preparations was riposte,... an effective defensive is only the preparation for a successful offensive. (Clausewitz) Wynne, If Germany...., p. 296. because the growing power and sophistication of Allied attacks could only be countered by offensive methods. [ Messines Ridge: 7—17 June ] [ Battle of Messines ] The first stage in the British plan was a preparatory attack on the German positions south of Ypres at Messines Ridge. These German positions dominated Ypres and unless neutralised, would be able to enfilade any British attack eastwards from the salient. { Sheldon p. 1. } Messines and Wytschaete were powerful positions but being on a forward slope were exposed to observation, this vulnerability was a cause of debate among the German commanders in the sector about their ability to withstand an attack and left the garrisons in the area somewhat anxious. { Terraine p. 118 } The villages had been extensively fortified and the area was littered with pillboxes, blockhouses and dugouts. In accordance with the German Army&apos;s new defensive methods, the forward area was lightly held with counter-attack formations in reserve. { Hart &amp; Steel pp. 42–43. } The attack on Messines was the responsibility of General Plumer and the British Second Army. Plumer&apos;s plan was for nine infantry divisions from X, IX and II Anzac Corps to advance 1,500 yards and take the first line of German defences on the front line of the ridge. This plan was extended by Haig to the second line of defences on the rear edge of the ridge including Wytschaete and to move down the far slope to take a further line of defences known as the Oosttaverne Line, an advance of about 3,000 yards. { Hart &amp; Steel pp. 41–42. } A preparatory bombardment for the attack began on 21 May; Plumer deployed 2,266 artillery pieces, of which 757 were heavy. { Hart &amp; Steel p. 44. } An important part of the bombardment was counter-battery fire against German artillery positions. In spite of the Germans bringing 630 guns to bear, this was largely successful. alt=In the foreground the limp bodies of dead German soldiers lie amidst the rubble of a destroyed trench. It is difficult to distinguish the soldiers from the rubble around them but three bodies are visible. One man wearing a helmet, has been pushed forward by the blast and although dead, appears to crouch forward. The British advance began on 7 June and was preceded by a unique display of military pyrotechnics. Since mid-1915, the British had been covertly digging mines under the German positions on the Messines Ridge. By June 1917 21 mines had been dug, filled with nearly [ 1000000 lb kg on ] of explosives. { Hart &amp; Steel pp. 41, 44. } The Germans knew the British were mining and had taken some countermeasures but they were surprised by the extent of the mining. { Sheldon p. 23. } Two of the British mines failed to detonate but the remaining 19 were fired at 03.10 GMT. The effect of the mine explosions was immense, destroying a large part of the German front line and support positions. As soon as the mines exploded, the British guns began firing a heavy creeping barrage which was closely followed by assaulting infantry and tanks. { Hart &amp; Steel pp. 50–54. } { Terraine p. 120. } Messines was taken at around 05.00. The second phase of the attack began at 07.00 and by 09.00 the British had taken Wytschaete. German resistance was scant and their positions were overwhelmed. At 15.10 the attack was renewed as fresh troops supported by tanks, pressed down the ridge to the final objectives, which were largely gained before dark on the 7th. { Hart &amp; Steel p. 55. } British losses in the morning were light, although the plan had expected casualties of up to 50% in the initial attack. As the infantry advanced over the back edge of the ridge, giving targets to German artillery and machine-guns, British artillery was less able to provide covering fire. Fighting continued on the lower slopes, on the east side of the ridge until 12 June. { Sheldon p. 28. } The Official Historian called the attack a great victory. All the objectives had been taken with 7,354 prisoners, 48 guns, 218 machine guns and 60 trench mortars. { Edmonds, J. OH 1917 II, p. 87. } It demonstrated that by bringing overwhelming firepower to bear and resisting the temptation to set distant objectives for the infantry, it was possible for the attacking side to prevail even against fortified positions. { Hart &amp; Steel p. 56. } { Sheldon pp. 28–29. } Second Army losses 1—12 June were 24,562 and German losses were &apos;about 23,000&apos; (10,000 missing) 21 May—10 June. { Edmonds,J. ibid, pp. 87—88. } The attack also succeeded in its objective of preparing the way for the main attack later in the summer, by removing the Germans from the dominating ground that they had held for two years, on the southern face of the Ypres salient. { Edmonds, J. ibid, p.87. } [ Battles of 3rd Ypres campaign ] [ First phase, Gough&apos;s command: May—August 1917 ] The British set-piece attack in mid-1917 { 18 pounder battery taking up new positions near Boesinghe, 31 July } Haig selected Gough to command the offensive on 30 April but the Fifth Army was south of Arras closing up to the Hindenburg Line, so Gough delayed his arrival in Ypres until the end of the Second Battle of Bullecourt, (3—17 May) handing over the Croisilles—Havrincourt front to the Third Army on 30 May. { Prior and Wilson, pp. 70–1 (pb edition). } On 10 June Gough took over the Ypres salient north of Messines Ridge; he planned an offensive based on the GHQ 1917 plan and the instructions he had received from Sir Douglas Haig. { Edmonds, J. OH 1917 II, p. 127 &amp; fn 2. } On the understanding that Haig wanted a more ambitious version, Gough held meetings with his Corps commanders on 6 and 16 June where the third objective, which included the German Wilhelm (third) Line, was added to the first and second objectives due to be taken on the first day. A fourth objective was also given for the first day but was only to be attempted opportunistically, in places where the German defence had collapsed. { Edmonds, J. ibid, pp. 126–127, 431–432. } The design of the attack was a methodical series of advances in three stages, at any one of which a halt could be called if necessary, while a further line was given for exploitation purposes should success warrant such action. Bax,C.E.O. &amp; Boraston, J.H. The Eighth Division in War 1914–1918, (2001) p.127. the decision to attempt this was left to the discretion of divisional commanders. { Edmonds OH 1917 II, app XIII, p. 432. } An attack of this nature was not a breakthrough operation; the German defensive position Flandern I lay 10,000—12,000 yards behind the front line and would not be attacked on the first day, { Prior and Wilson, pp. 72, 75 (pb edition). } nonetheless it was more ambitious than Plumer&apos;s earlier plan, which had involved an advance of 1,000—1,750 yards. Major-General J. Davidson, Director of Operations at GHQ wrote in a memorandum that there was &quot; ambiguity as to what was meant by a step-by-step attack with limited objectives &quot; { Davidson, Sir J. Haig Master of the Field (2010), p. 29. } and suggested reverting to a 1,750 yard advance to increase the concentration of British artillery. Gough&apos;s reply stressed the need to plan for opportunities to take ground left temporarily undefended and that this was more likely in the first attack which was long prepared: It is important to recognise that the results to be looked for from a well-organised attack which has taken weeks and months to prepare are great, much ground can be gained and prisoners and guns captured during the first day or two. { Edmonds OH1917II app XV, p. 440. } &lt; p &gt; I think we should certainly aim at the definite capture of the Green Line, and that, should the situation admit of our infantry advancing without much opposition to the Red Line, it would be of the greatest advantage to us to do so. { Edmonds, J. OH 1917 II app XV, p. 441. } Haig arranged a meeting with Davidson, Gough and Plumer on 28 June where { Davidson, (2010) p. 32. } Plumer supported Gough&apos;s plan and Haig let it stand. { Prior and Wilson, pp. 76–77 (pb edition). } Maxse, Gough&apos;s XVIII Corps commander, left numerous sarcastic comments in the margins of his copy of the Davidson memo, to the effect that he was being too pessimistic. { Simpson, A. The Operational Role of British Corps Command on the Western Front 1914–18, (2001) pp.121–123. } [ Air operations ] Vth Brigade HQ RFC moved with 5th Army HQ and by 31 July the Allied air concentration from the Lys to the sea consisted of 840 aircraft, 330 being fighters. By 31 July the German Fourth Army had about 600 aircraft, 200 of them single-seat fighters { Jones, H. A. The War in the Air, Volume IV (2002), p. 141. } The intended slow build-up of Allied air activity over the British Fifth and Second armies was changed on 8 July to an immediate maximum effort, due to the Luftstreitkräfte (the Imperial German Air Service) making a counter-effort of air and artillery spotting and by attacking British Corps aircraft (conducting operations over the front line, while Army aircraft went further afield). { Jones, H. A. The War in the Air, Volume IV, p. 145. } Poor weather stopped this until 11 July. The Germans had been sending larger formations into action and on 12 July the greatest amount of air activity since the war began took place. Late on, about thirty German fighters engaged British and French fighters in a dogfight lasting for an hour. Nine Royal Flying Corps aircraft were lost for a claim of fourteen German aircraft for the day. { Jones, H. A. The War in the Air, Volume IV, p.156. } Until the end of July the British and French air effort by night and day was resisted by the Luftstreitkräfte until losses wore it down. The Germans continued periodically to assemble bigger formations and on 26 July near Polygon Wood fifty Albatros scouts were engaged by thirty-seven British fighters. During the melée four German reconnaissance aircraft were able to slip over the line and reconnoitre. Next evening eight British aircraft over Menin lured about 20 Albatros scouts to Polygon Wood, where 59 British fighters were waiting. Allied and German aircraft in the vicinity joined in the dogfight and after an hour the surviving German aircraft withdrew. The British decoys shot down six German aircraft and the ambushers another three for a loss of two British aircraft. { Jones, H.A. ibid p. 158. } On 27 July an RFC reconnaissance aircraft detected a German tactical withdrawal, which enabled XIV Corps to occupy 3,000 yards of the German front line. Next day the fine weather allowed the RFC to conduct a large amount of observation for counter-battery fire and to detect numerous German batteries which had been moved. Operations to deprive the Germans of air observation over the attack front were curtailed by poor weather on 29 and 30 July. On the commencement of the ground offensive on 31 July, low cloud returned and stopped the air operation in support. Small numbers of aircraft were sent out to seek targets of opportunity and some contact patrolling was managed at very low level, giving some information about the progress of the ground battle and leaving thirty British aircraft damaged by bullets and shells. { Jones,ibid p.162. } Major-General Trenchard, commander of the Royal Flying Corps wrote to the ground commanders after the battle, that study of low flying attacks on German troops concluded that its effect was short-lived, though highly demoralising for the victims and equally stimulating to friendly infantry in the vicinity and that these attacks would have best effect when co-ordinated with ground operations. Trenchard emphasised that the infantry should be told that much of the air effort took place out of sight and than absence should not be taken for inactivity. Rain continued until 5 August and seriously interrupted artillery observation flying. { Jones, H.A. The War in the Air IV, p. 167-168. } [ Battle of Pilckem Ridge: 31 July—2 August ] [ Battle of Pilckem Ridge ] The British attack began at 3.50  am on 31 July, &quot;... a hurricane of fire, completely beyond anyone&apos;s experience, broke out. The entire earth of Flanders rocked and seemed to be on fire. This was not just drum fire; it was as though Hell itself had slipped its bonds. What were the terrors of Verdun and the Somme compared to this grotesquely huge outpouring of raw power? &quot; (General von Kuhl) { Kuhl, Der Weltkrieg in Sheldon, J. The German Army at Passchendaele, pp. 121–122. } the attack was meant to commence at dawn but low cloud meant that it was still dark. { Prior and Wilson, p. 89. } The main attack of the offensive by II Corps across the Ghelveult Plateau to the south, confronted the principal German defensive concentration of artillery, ground-holding and Eingreif division s. The attack had most success on the left (north), in front of XIV Corps and the French First Army. In this section of the front, the Entente forces advanced 2,500–3000  yards, up to the line of the Steenbeck river. { Prior and Wilson, p. 90. } In the centre of the British attack, XVIII Corps and XIX Corps pushed forward to the line of the Steenbeck to consolidate and sent advanced guards towards the Green and Red lines, (on XIX Corps&apos;s front) an advance of some 4,000 yards. { Prior &amp; Wilson, p. 92. } In these areas, the preliminary bombardment had succeeded in destroying the front line of the German position and the creeping barrage was effective in supporting the infantry attack at least as far as the first objective. This meant that the infantry and some tanks had the strength to deal with German strongpoints encountered after the first line and vorfeldzone had been penetrated and were able to push on. { Prior and Wilson, pp. 90–1. } The success of the British advance in the centre of the front caused some concern to Von Armin the army commander and his Chief of Staff Von Lossberg. While the defensive system was designed to deal with some penetration, it was meant to prevent the 4,000-yard advance that XVIII and XIX Corps had achieved. 50th Reserve Division, either side of Westroosebeek and 221st Division, between Moorslede and Zonnebeke, the Eingreif division s of Group Ypres were ordered (mit fester Stimme gab ich den Befehl) to counter-attack the flanks of the British break-in, supported by all available artillery and aircraft at about midday. The three brigades facing the counter-attack were depleted and strung out after dealing with German strongpoints earlier in the morning. The brigades could not communicate with their artillery as visibility was lost in the rain. The German counter-attack was able to drive them back to the &apos;green line&apos; with 70% losses for the day, where the German attack were stopped by mud, artillery and machine-gun fire. { Prior and Wilson, pp. 94–5. } Local counter-attacks on the II Corps front and that of Second Army to its south were not supported by Eingreif divisions as the British there had not reached the Albrecht (second) Line. Colonel von Lossberg was promoted to Major General the next day. { Wynne, G.C. If Germany Attacks... (1976) p. 302. } The British Official History { Edmonds, J. OH 1917 II (1948), p. 178. } gives Fifth Army casualties for 31 July to 3 August as 27,001; 3,697 of them killed. Second Army casualties 31 July to 2 August are 4,819; 769 killed. German Fourth Army casualties (3rd Guard, 235th, 38th, 22nd Reserve, 10th Bavarian, 18th Reserve, 16th, 32nd, 2nd Guard Reserve (Eingreif), 12th (Eingrief), 221st, 52nd Reserve (Eingreif), 207th (Eingreif), 50th Reserve (Eingreif), 111th and 23rd Reserve divisions) { US War Dept (1920), Histories of 251 Divisions of the German Army Which Participated in the War (1914–1918). } { http://ia700401.us.archive.org/3/items/cu31924027835317/cu31924027835317.pdf } for 21—31 July are &apos;30,000 in round numbers&apos; { Der Weltkrieg vol xiii, 1942 in Edmonds, J. ibid. } excluding &apos;wounded whose recovery was to be expected in a reasonable time&apos;. The British Official Historian controversially added another 10,000 for this category. The accuracy of Edmonds&apos;s casualty statistics for the German army has been questioned ever since. { Sheldon, J. The German Army at Cambrai (2009), p. 312. } [ II Corps preliminary operation: 10 August ] Intended for 9 August, (after several rain delays) to prepare the way for the general offensive due on 13 August (which eventually began on 16 August) but delayed for 24 hours by a thunderstorm on the 8th (with 10mm of rain, after the 25mm which fell between 1 and 4 August), { Sheldon, J.The German Army at Passchendaele, p. 108. } II Corps attacked on the 10th to capture the rest of the &apos;black line&apos; not taken or held on 31 July. British artillery fire was distributed across the battlefront for the general attack by II, XIX and XVIII Corps on the &apos;green line&apos;, (slightly beyond the German Wilhelm (third) Line between Polygon Wood and Langemarck) while the Germans concentrated their artillery on the II and XIX Corps fronts. British counter-battery efforts were hampered by the adverse weather, which made air observation extremely difficult so much of the effort was wasted by inaccurate fire and an inability to see German artillery shifting position (among three or four alternative emplacements per battery). The state of the ground, German artillery fire and British artillery losses foreshadowed the situation in late October opposite Passchendaele Ridge. { Edmonds, OH 1917 II, p. 184. } 8th and 30th Divisions were relieved by 25th and 18th Divisions by 4 August but delays caused by the weather meant that despite reliefs every 48 hours for the front-line troops, they were exhausted by the 10th. The advance succeeded but German artillery fire and infantry counter-attacks isolated the British infantry of 18th Division, which had captured Glencorse Wood and about 7 p.m. German infantry behind a smokescreen recaptured all but the north-west corner of the Wood. Only 25th Division&apos;s gains on Westhoek Ridge were held. { Edmonds, J. OH 1917 II, pp. 185–187. } By 14 August these divisions had been relieved by 56th Division on the right and 8th Division on the left. { Kincaid-Smith, M. The 25th Division in France and Flanders, (2001) p.93. } Albrecht von Thaer, Staff Officer at Group Wytshchate noted that casualties after 14 days in the line averaged 1,500—2,000 men compared to the Somme 1916 average of 4,000 men and that German morale was better than in 1916. { Hagenlucke, H. The German High Command, p. 52 in Liddle Passchendaele in Perspective, pp. 45–58. } Rupprecht&apos;s army group had lost 85,528 casualties 1 June—10 August. { Hagenlucke, H. The German High Command, fn p. 58 citing Rupprecht II, p. 235 in Liddle, Passchendaele in Perspective, pp. 45–58. } [ Battle of Langemarck: 16—18 August ] [ Battle of Langemarck (1917) ] Fifth Army headquarters was influenced by the effect that delay would have on the coastal operation, which needed the high tides at the end of August or it would have to be postponed for a month. { Edmonds, OH 1917 II, p. 190. } Gough intended the green line (just beyond the German Wilhelm (third) Line) from Polygon Wood to Langemarck not held on 31 July by II, XIX and XVIII Corps to be taken. { Edmonds, J. OH 1917 II pp. 189–202. } Gough delayed the general offensive for a day but then a thunderstorm on the 14th forced another 24 hour postponement to the early hours of 16 August. In the II Corps area the disappointment of 10 August was repeated, with the infantry managing a modest advance, being isolated by German artillery and then (except in the 25th Division area near Westhoek) forced back to their start line by German infantry counter-attacks, after running out of ammunition when German artillery fire isolated the attacking troops from their supply services behind them. Attempts by the German infantry to advance further were stopped by British artillery fire inflicting heavy losses. { Edmonds, J. OH 1917 II, p. 194. } The advance further north in the XVIII Corps area retook and held the north end of St Julien and the area south-east of Langemarck while XIV Corps captured Langemarck and the Wilhelm (third) Line north of the Ypres—Staden railway near the Kortebeek. The French First Army conformed, pushing up to the Kortebeek and St Jansbeck stream west of the northern stretch of the Wilhelm (third) Line where it crossed to the east side of the Kortebeek. { Edmonds, J. OH 1917 II, p. 201 } [ Subsidiary operations: 19—27 August ] On 17 August Gough held a discussion with the corps commanders which decided to conduct smaller operations by corps but this failed to address the effect of German artillery fire, which had revived in the period of poor visibility and rain, in which British counter-battery results were correspondingly depressed. Most of the smaller attacks failed to hold ground, although XVIII had a success on 19 August. Exploiting observation from higher ground to the east, the Germans were able to inflict heavy losses on the British divisions holding the new line beyond Langemarck. After two fine dry days 17—18 August, XIX and XVIII Corps began pushing closer to the Wilhelm (third) Line. On 20 August an operation by British tanks, artillery and infantry captured strongpoints along the St Julien—Poelkappelle road and two days later more ground was gained (despite the tank support mostly ditching behind the British front line) by XVIII and XIX Corps, which still left them overlooked by the Germans in the uncaptured part of the Wilhelm (third) Line, from east of Langemarck south to the Ypres—Zonnebeke road. { Edmonds, J. OH 1917 II, p. 203 and sketch 20. } II Corps resumed operations to capture Nonne Bosschen, Glencorse Wood and Inverness Copse around the Menin Road on 22 August, an operation which failed with heavy losses on both sides. The British general offensive intended for 25 August was changed because of this failure to hold ground, then postponed due to more bad weather. { Wynne, G.C. Army Quarterly (Jan 1935), reprinted in Landrecies to Cambrai, Case Studies of German Offensive and Defensive Operations on the Western Front 1914–17 (ed Rodgers, D. 2011.) pp. 162–167. } Attacks on 27 August were minor operations which were costly and inconclusive. Haig called a halt to these operations amidst tempestuous weather. { Edmonds, J. OH 1917 II, p.208. } Gough issued Modifications Required in Our Attack Formations to Meet The Enemy&apos;s Present System of Defence on 24 August which laid down a new infantry formation of skirmish lines followed by &quot; worms &quot;. Cavan noted that pill-box defences required broad front attacks so as to engage them simultaneously. { Simpson, A. The operational role of British corps command on the Western Front, 1914–18 pp. 130–134. } British casualties 31 July—28 August are given as 68,010 by the British Official Historian; 10,266 being killed, with a claim that 37 German divisions had been exhausted and withdrawn. { Edmonds, J. OH 1917 II p. 209. } On 20 August Sixt von Armin the German Fourth Army commander told the Kaiser that in the battle his army had 84,000 losses. { Hagenlucke, H. The German High Command, p. 55 in Liddle, P. (ed) Passchendaele in Perspective, ch 4, pp. 45–58. } [ Western Front ] [ Western Front ] Several British and French operations took place beyond Flanders during the 3rd Ypres campaign, intended to assist Allied operations at Ypres by obstructing the flow of munitions and reinforcements to the German Fourth Army in Belgium and to exploit opportunities created by the German need to economise elsewhere. [ Battle of Hill 70: 15—25 August ] [ Battle of Hill 70 ] Hill 70 was a subsidiary operation of World War I between the Canadian Corps and five divisions of the German Sixth Army. The battle took place along the Western Front on the outskirts of Lens in the Nord-Pas-de-Calais region of France between 15 August 1917 and 25 August 1917. The effect of the British operation here was felt in Flanders The fighting at Lens cost us, once again, the expenditure of considerable numbers of troops who had to be replaced. The whole previously worked-out plan for relieving the fought-out troops in Flanders had been wrecked. Von Kuhl, Der Weltkrieg, in Terraine, J. The Road to Passchendaele, p. 234 (1977) [ Second Offensive Battle of Verdun: 20 August—9 September ] [ Battle of Verdun ] Petain had committed the Second Army to an attack at Verdun in mid-July in support of the operations in Flanders. The Second Offensive Battle of Verdun was delayed, partly due to the mutinies which had affected the French army after the failure of the Nivelle Offensive and also because a German attack at Verdun 28—29 June captured part of the ground intended as a jumping-off point for the French attack. A French counter-attack on 17 July captured the ground, then the Germans regained it on 1 August, then took ground on the east bank on 16 August. { Doughty, R.A. Pyrrhic Victory (2005), pp. 380–383. } The French &apos;Second Offensive Battle of Verdun&apos; finally began on 20 August and by 9 September had taken 10,000 prisoners. Fighting continued sporadically into October, adding to the German army&apos;s difficulties on the Western Front and elsewhere. &quot; On the left bank, close to the Meuse, one division had failed, nor had we been fortunate on the right bank; and yet both here and in Flanders everything possible had been done to avoid failure.... The French army was once more capable of the offensive. It had quickly overcome its depression. &quot; (Ludendorff, memoirs). Ludendorff, ii, p. 479 in Terraine,J. The Road to Passchendaele p. 235 (1977) There was no counter-stroke or counter-offensive as the local Eingreif divisions were in Flanders. { Edmonds, J. OH 1917 II, p. 231 fn 3. } [ Eastern Front ] [ Eastern Front (World War I) ] After the brief success of the Kerensky Offensive and its disastrous sequel, British and French commanders on the Western Front had to reckon on the German western army being strengthened by reinforcements from the Eastern Front in late 1917. { On the role of the British Forces should Russia fall out of the war, Haig, 8 october 1917 in Terraine, J. Road to Passchendaele (1977) pp. 290—297. } [ Kerensky Offensive: 1—19 July ] [ Kerensky Offensive ] The Russian army launched the Kerensky Offensive in an attempt to honour the agreement struck with its allies at the Chantilly meeting of 15–16 November 1916. Ludendorff committed his general reserve of six divisions against it 8—28 July. [ Capture of Riga: 1—5 September ] After smashing the Kerensky Offensive, Ludendorff&apos;s general reserve captured Riga, a major fortress which had resisted German capture for two years, on 1—5 September 1917 and in Operation Albion September—October 1917 took the islands at the mouth of the Gulf of Riga. { Edmonds, J. OH 1917 II, p. 234. } The perceived threat to the Russian capital of Petrograd, where Bolshevik-dominated &quot; Red Guards &quot; had to be armed to resist the threatened coup by General Kornilov, was the nail in the coffin of the moderate socialist Kerensky government in Russia. [ Battles of 3rd Ypres campaign ] [ Second phase, Plumer takes over: 25 August—10 November ] The British set-piece attack in late 1917 Despite the success of the German Fourth Army in defeating the British advance to the objectives of 31 July in August, By the middle of the month the German army had mixed views concerning the progress of operations. On the one hand, the defensive successes which had been achieved were a source of satisfaction, but the price being paid in casualties, bearing in mind the presure on manpower on all fronts, was becoming a cause of concern. Sheldon, J. The German Army at Passchendaele, p. 119. The rain, bombardments and British air attacks also undermined the fighting power of the German infantry. { Sheldon, J. The German Army at Paschendaele, p. 120. } Haig decided to transfer more of the weight of the offensive towards the south-east, along the southern half of Passchendaele Ridge. { Nicholson p. 308. } Principal authority for the offensive changed to the Second Army under command of General Plumer on 25 August. Gough had abandoned attempts to exploit opportunities created by the &quot; bite &quot; part of the operation in his Operation Order of 31 July, which required II Corps to capture the rest of the black line (a 31 July objective) on 2 August and then II, XIX and XVIII Corps to advance to the original green line on 4 August; plans which corresponded to the delayed attack of 10 August by II Corps, the battle of Langemarck (16—18 August) and later operations by the same corps. { Edmonds, J. OH 1917 II, pp. 445–446. } Instead of being three to four miles distant [actually 3,000–3,500 yards, plus another 1,500–2,500 yards to the red line should German resistance collapse], as on 31 July, the objective was 1,500–2,000 yards away. The assault was timed to be much quicker, so that the final objective, the Wilhelm Line at the back of the forward battlezone, was to be reached by 8.00 a.m..... it was a procedure which confounded the German counter-attack divisions. After crossing two miles of mud they found the British already established along a new defence line. Consequently the forward battlezone and its weak garrison was lost beyond recapture. Wynne, G.C. If Germany Attacks, The Battle in Depth in the West, (1976) p. 303. Plumer&apos;s plans continued the evolution of British attacking methods; after a pause of about three weeks, he intended to capture Gheluvelt Plateau in four steps, with six days between each step to allow time to bring forward artillery and supplies. { Edmonds p. 237. } Each attack was to have even more limited geographical objectives than the attacks in August, with infantry in echelons where a battalion attacked the first objective and two battalions the further ones, with more elaborate artillery covering fire possible than Gough&apos;s (which had been foreshadowed in the Fifth Army GOC R.A. Major General H. Uniacke&apos;s report of 25 August). { G.O.C, R.A. Fifth Army letter RA/225 in Marble, S. The Infantry Cannot Do with a Gun Less: The Place of the Artillery in the BEF, 1914–1918, (2001) App 22. } This was to ensure that more infantry were organised on tactically advantageous ground, in contact with their artillery and with more air support when they received German counter-attacks. &quot; In 1917 the difference between a &apos;thruster&apos; like Gough, and a &apos;methodical&apos; general like Plumer, satisfied with smaller gains, is difficult to discern in actual plans or orders. It was nevertheless there.... &quot; { Terraine, J. The Road to Passchendaele, p. 224 } In late 1916 the German army had adopted defence in depth, whereby the front line was lightly held and reserve troops were deployed outside British field artillery range. { Malkasian p. 41. } The previous British attacks had exhausted themselves without significantly affecting the fighting capacity of the main German troop body. German reserves had repulsed some British advanced troops while they were disorganised and reduced by losses by counter-attacks, albeit with heavy losses. From 31st July 1917 till well into September was a period of tremendous anxiety.... The fighting on the Western Front became more serious than any the German army had yet experienced.... and the costly August battles imposed a great strain on the Western troops. Our wastage had been so high as to cause grave misgivings, and exceeded all our expectations (Ludendorff, memoirs). Ludendorff in Edmonds, OH 1917 II, p. 210. Plumer&apos;s tactical refinements sought to undermine the German defence-in-depth by limiting objectives to a shallower penetration and then fighting the principal battle against German counter-attacking (Eingreif) divisions, rather than against the local defenders. By further reorganising the infantry&apos;s reserves, Plumer ensured that the echelons in depth of the attacking divisions roughly corresponded to the echelons in depth of the local German counter-attack reserves and their Eingreif divisions. This meant that more support was provided for the advance and consolidation against German counter-attacks. More units would attack on narrower fronts and troops would advance no more than [ 1500 yd m ] into the German defence zone before consolidating their position. When the Germans counter-attacked they would find a zone of defence-in-depth still heavily protected by artillery like the British green and black lines had been on 31 July, suffering heavy casualties to little effect. The tempo of these operations would add to German difficulties in replacing tired divisions, because of the transport bottlenecks behind the German front. The pause in British operations while Plumer moved even more artillery into the area of the Gheluvelt plateau helped to mislead the Germans. Albrecht von Thaer Staff Officer at Group Wytschaete wrote that it was almost boring. { Hagenlucke, H. The German High Command, p. 52 in Liddle, P. (ed) Passchendaele in Perspective, ch 4, pp. 45–58. } At first General von Kuhl (Chief of Staff, Army Group Crown Prince Rupprecht) doubted that the offensive had ended but by 13 September had changed his mind, &quot; My innermost conviction that the battle of Flanders has finished is strengthened more and more. &quot;. Despite Kuhl&apos;s caution, two divisions, 13 heavy batteries and 12 field batteries of artillery, three fighter squadrons and four air force units were transferred from the Fourth Army. { German Official Account in Terraine, J. The Road to Passchendaele, p. 257. } [ Battle of the Menin Road Ridge: 20—25 September ] [ Menin Road Ridge ] Wounded men at the side of a road after the Battle of Menin Road The plan included more emphasis on the use of heavy and medium artillery { Edmonds p. 238. } brought into the area of the plateau from the Third and Fourth armies and VIII Corps on the right of Second Army { Edmonds, J. OH 1917 II, p.244 &amp; fn 2. } This was to destroy German concrete pill-boxes and machine gun nests which were more numerous in the battle zones being attacked, during the preparatory bombardment and to engage in more counter-battery fire. 575 heavy and medium and 720 field guns and howitzers were allocated to Plumer for the battle; { Edmonds p. 239. } this was equivalent to one artillery piece for every five yards of the attack front, more than double the proportion used at the Battle of Pilckem Ridge. { Leach p. 76. } The British began a desultory bombardment on 31 August { Edmonds, OH 1917 II, p. 247. } and also sought to neutralize the German batteries with poison gas in the days before the attack, including gas bombardments on the last three evenings before the assault. { Cook p. 149. } Aircraft were to be used for much more organised air observation of German troop movements to and on the battlefield to avoid the failures of previous battles where too few aircraft had been burdened with too many duties in bad weather. { Jones, H.A. The War in the Air IV, p. 181. } On 20 September the Allies attacked on a 14,500 yard front and captured most their objectives to a depth of about [ 1500 yd ] by mid-morning. { Birdwood, Khaki and Gown, pp. 314–315 in Terraine, J. Road to Passchendaele, p. 261. } The Germans made many counter-attacks, beginning around 3.00pm until early evening, all of which failed to gain ground or made only a temporary penetration of the new British positions on the Second Army front. A small area on the Fifth Army front attacked by 51st Division was recaptured by German counter-attacks. &quot; On the V Corps front they launched no less than six counter-attacks.... Their losses were very heavy and we captured over 1,300 prisoners. &quot; (Gough). { The Fifth Army, p. 208 in Terraine, OH 1917 II, p. 262. } The Germans by this time had an improvised front line, with very deep dugouts and concrete pillboxes, supported by artillery ranged on no man&apos;s land. The attack was a great success and caused no small panic to German commanders; proving quite clearly to them that their defences could no longer fend off a well-prepared attack in good weather. { Harris, J. P. Douglas Haig and the First World War (2008), p.366. } The German Eingreif divisions [16th Bavarian Division at Gheluwe, 236th Division at Moorslede and 234th Division at Oostniewkerke in Flandern III] Edmonds, J, OH 1917 II, p. 273, fn 3. were assembled at their stations at 8am in readiness to move.... In spite of this the counter-attacks did not take effect until the late afternoon; for the tremendous British barrage fire caused most serious loss of time and crippled the thrust power of the reserves. (Der Weltkrieg) Der Weltkrieg 1914 bis 1918, vol xiii, p. 75 in Terraine, J. The Road to Passchendaele, p. 262. The British Official History records that the counter-attack divisions had been held back waiting for another British advance which never came. Edmonds, J. OH 1917 II, p. 273, fn 3. Minor attacks took place after 20 September as both sides jockeyed for position and reorganised their defences. { Sheldon, J. The German Army at Passchendaele, p. 165. } A larger attack by the Germans on 25 September recaptured pillboxes at the south western end of Polygon Wood at the cost of heavy casualties. Not long after, the German positions near Polygon Wood were swept away by Plumer&apos;s attack of 26 September (the Battle of Polygon Wood). British casualties 20—25 September are given by the British Official Historian as 20,255; 3,148 being killed. 3,243 prisoners were taken with &apos;very heavy&apos; losses of killed or wounded inflicted on the German defenders. [ German defensive changes: 22 September ] Fourth Army defensive changes: September—November 1917 After the Battle of Menin Road the German defensive deployment was changed. In August German front-line divisions had two regiments of three battalions forward, with the third regiment in reserve. The front battalions had needed to be relieved much more frequently than expected due to the British bombardments, attacks and the weather which had caused units to become mixed up. The reserve regiments had not been able to intervene early enough and so the front battalions had been unsupported until the Eingreif divisions arrived, some hours after the commencement of the attack. { Rogers, D. (Ed.) Landrecies to Cambrai, (Essays by G. C. Wynne from Army Quarterly 1924–1939) (2010) p. 168. } The deployment was changed to increase the number of troops in the front zone. By 26 September all three regiments of the front-line division were forward, each holding an area 1,000 yards wide and 3,000 yards deep. One battalion was forward with the second in support and the third in close reserve. These battalions were to move forward successively to engage the fresh enemy battalions advancing through those that had delivered the first attack. The Eingreif division s were to deliver an organised attack with artillery support later in the day, before the British could consolidate their new line. { Rogers, D. (Ed.) Landrecies to Cambrai, (Essays by G. C. Wynne from Army Quarterly 1924–1939) (2010) p. 170. } This change was intended to remedy the neutralization of the front division&apos;s reserve by the British artillery so that it could intervene before the Eingreif divisions arrived. On 22 September new requirements were laid down: more artillery counter-fire was to be used between British attacks, half to be counter-battery and half against infantry; more raiding was to compel the British to hold the line in greater strength, thus giving the artillery a denser target; better artillery observation was required in the battle zone to increase the accuracy of German artillery fire when British troops advanced into it and quicker counter-attacks were to be made. { Der Weltkrieg, xiii, p. 75 quoted in Edmonds, J. OH 1917 II, p. 295. } [ Battle of Polygon Wood: 26 September ] [ Battle of Polygon Wood ] On 21 September Haig instructed the Fifth and Second Armies to make the next step across the Gheluvelt Plateau on a front of 8,500 yards. I ANZAC Corps would conduct the main advance of about 1,200 yards to complete the occupation of Polygon Wood and the south of Zonnebeke. X Corps to the south was to attack either side of the Menin Road and Fifth Army in the north was to advance to occupy a line from Zonnebeke to Kansas Cross and Hill 40 near Zonnebeke station. { Edmonds, J. OH 1917 II, p. 280. } Second Army altered its Corps frontages soon after the attack of 20 September so that each attacking division could be concentrated on a 1,000 yard front. Roads and light railways were built behind the new front line to allow artillery and ammunition to be moved forward, beginning on 20 September; in fine weather this was finished in four days. As before Menin Road, bombardment and counter-battery fire began immediately, with practice barrages fired daily as a minimum. Artillery from VIII and IX Corps in the south acted to threaten attacks on Zandvoorde and Warneton. At 5.50 a.m. on 26 September the five layers of barrage fired by the British artillery and machine-guns began. Dust and smoke added to the morning mist so the infantry advanced on compass bearings and rushed the German outposts of 3rd Reserve Division and part of 50th Reserve Division, most falling immediately. { Edmonds, OH 1917 II, p. 284, fn2. } Each of the three German ground-holding divisions attacked on 26 September had an Eingreif division in support, twice the ratio of 20 September. No ground captured by the British had been regained and the counter-attacks had managed only to reach ground that the survivors of the front-line divisions had retired to. Second Army estimated that ten divisional artilleries had supported the German troops defending the Gheluvelt Plateau, doubling the Royal Artillery casualties compared to the previous week. British losses were 15,375; 1,215 being killed. Der Weltkrieg gives 38,500 casualties between 11 September and 30 September (236th (Eingreif), 10th Ersatz, 50th Reserve, 23rd Reserve (Eingreif), 17th (Eingreif), 19th Reserve and 4th Bavarian (Eingreif) divisions) to which the British Official Historian controversially added 30% for lightly wounded. { Edmonds, J. OH 1917 II, p. 293. } [ German defensive changes: 30 September ] Fourth Army defensive changes: September—November 1917 After the severe defeats of 20 and 26 September the German commanders led by Ludendorff made more changes to the defensive deployment of their troops and altered the counter-attack tactics, which had been negated by Plumer&apos;s more conservative limited attacks. German counter-attack (Eingreif) divisions had engaged in a manner analogous to an advance to contact during mobile operations; { Sheldon, J. The German army at.... p. 184. } before September this practice had given the Germans several (albeit costly) defensive successes. The defensive counter-attacks in September had been assaults on reinforced field positions, due to the restrained nature of British infantry advances in better visibility, which greatly increased the effectiveness of artillery—infantry liaison. German counter-attacks were defeated with heavy casualties, after arriving too late to take advantage of the attackers&apos; disorganisation. The British had made time to establish a defence in depth, behind standing barrages in dry clear weather, with increased air support for observation of German troop movements, contact patrolling and ground-attack operations by the RFC. Systematic defensive artillery support was forfeited by the Germans&apos; uncertainty over the position of their infantry, just when the British infantry benefitted from the opposite. { Edmonds, J. OH 1917 II, pp. 294–295. } on 28 September Albrecht von Thaer, Staff Officer at Group Wytschaete wrote that the experience was awful and that he did not know what to do. { Hagenlucke, H. The German High Command, p. 53 in Liddle, P. (ed) Passchendaele in Perspective, ch 4, pp. 45–58. } Ludendorff wrote, After each attack I discussed the tactical experiences with General von Kuhl and Colonel von Lossberg.... Our defensive tactics had to be developed further, somehow or other. We were all agreed on that. The only thing was, it was so infinitely difficult to hit on the right remedy. (Memoirs.) Ludendorff, Memoirs, vol ii, p. 489 in Terraine, J. The Road to Passchendaele. pp. 278–279. Ludendorff ordered a strengthening of forward garrisons and the reinforcement of the front garrisons of the ground holding divisions, supporting the front divisions with the Stoss regiment of the Eingreif division behind each one in the artillery protective line (behind the forward battle zone), to launch counter-attacks while the British were consolidating and the holding back of the Eingreif divisions, which were to be used instead in a methodical counter-stroke on the next day or the one after { Wynne, G. C. If Germany Attacks p. 307. } and also for spoiling attacks and counter-attacks between British offensives. { Sheldon, J. The German Army at Passchendaele, pp. 190–191. } All available machine-guns including those of the support and reserve battalions of the front line regiments were sent into the forward zone to form a cordon of four to eight guns every 250 yards. { Wynne, G. C. If Germany...., pp. 307–308. } The result of these discussions was reflected in a Fourth Army operation order of 30 September, which pointed out that the German position in Flanders was restricted by the topography, the coast and the Dutch frontier which made local withdrawals impossible. Efforts to increase British infantry losses in line with the instructions of 22 September were to be made, with more bombardment by feld artillery and by using at least half of the heavy artillery&apos;s ammunition for observed fire on infantry positions like captured pill-boxes, command posts, machine-gun nests, duckboard tracks and field railways. Gas bombardment was to be increased on forward positions and artillery emplacements whenever the winds allowed. Every effort was to be made to induce the British to reinforce their forward positions, where the German artillery could engage them, by making spoiling attacks to recapture pill-boxes, improve defensive positions and harass the British with patrols and diversionary bombardments. { Sheldon, J. The German Army at Passchendaele, pp. 184–186. } Between 26 September and 3 October the Germans attacked and counter-attacked at least 24 times. { Terraine, J. OH 1917 II, p. 278. } The British had not been complacent and these changes were predicted in an intelligence summary of 1 October. { Edmonds, J. OH 1917 II, p. 318, fn 2. } { Freeman, J. A Planned Massacre? British Intelligence Analysis and the German Army at the Battle of Broodseinde,4 October 1917, p. 70. } British military intelligence did predict the major-German counter attack on 4 October but could not confirm it. It had accurately monitored the state and intentions of the German Army on the front during the build up to the battle. Freeman, J. A Planned Massacre....?, p. 71. [ Battle of Broodseinde: 4 October ] [ Battle of Broodseinde ] { Ernest Brooks. } { alt=Five soldiers silhouetted against the sky. Rays of sun burst through dark clouds to create a dramatic and atmospheric shot. They are all wearing steel helmets, and three of them are clearly carrying rifles and backpacks. } The Battle of Broodseinde was the last assault launched by Plumer in good weather. { Robbins p. 128. } The operation aimed to complete the capture of the Gheluvelt Plateau and the occupation of Broodseinde Ridge. This would protect the southern flank of the British line and permit attacks on the Passchendaele Ridge to the east. { Bean p. 837. } The attack was originally planned for 6 October to permit II Anzac Corps time to prepare. { Prior &amp; Wilson p. 133. } Haig was anxious about the possibility of deteriorating weather so he pushed to have the assault advanced by two days. { Groom p. 207. } The Germans were equally concerned about the amount of ridge-line the British held near Zonnebeke and sought to recapture as much as possible in a local attack on 4 October. { Prior &amp; Wilson p. 135. } In response to the British tactic of using a shallower advance to trigger German counter-attacks and then deluging them with observed artillery fire in the two previous battles, the Germans reinforced their front line to prevent the British from capturing their forward positions. This change failed as it left an increased number of German troops vulnerable to the British artillery. { Malkasian p. 42. } On 4 October, 12 divisions from the British Fifth and Second armies attacked German positions along a [ 14000 yd ] front. By coincidence, Australian troops from I ANZAC Corps met troops from the German 45th Reserve Division in no man&apos;s land when the assaults commenced simultaneously. { Bean p. 847. } The success of the British advance varied but the losses inflicted on the Germans were devastating. The southern most corps achieved limited success, while attacks between Menin Road and Polygon Wood generated moderate gains. Further north &quot; The main objectives had been gained and the number of prisoners was exceptionally large, the Second army alone having taken over four thousand. &quot;. { Edmonds, OH 1917II op. cit. pp.  316–317 } After the British infantry reached their final positions, their artillery fired a standing barrage for two and a half hours, allowing the troops to consolidate. { Bean p. 866. } The British captured 5,000 prisoners during the battle. { Groom p. 208. } The British high command concluded that the number of enemy casualties meant that German resistance was faltering and resolved to make another attack immediately, although suggestions for a further advance that day were rejected. In his memoirs, Ludendorff wrote, &quot; The battle on the 4 October was extraordinarily severe and again we only came through it with enormous losses. &quot;. { My War Memories 1914–1918, p.  490. } Foot Guard Regt No. 5 described it as the worst day yet experienced in the war. { Edmonds,J. OH 1917 II p.  316, fn 1. } On 7 October the defence reverted to the previous system despite the effect of British artillery on the Eingreif divisions as they advanced. [ German defensive changes: 7—13 October ] Fourth Army defensive changes: September—November 1917 On 7 October the Fourth Army rescinded the reinforcement of the front defence zone after the disaster of 4 October. Front line regiments were dispersed again, with reserve battalions moved back behind the artillery protective line and the Eingreif divisions organised to intervene as swiftly as possible once an attack commenced, despite the risk of being devastated by the British artillery. Counter-battery efforts to reduce British artillery fire were to be emphasised to protect the Eingreif divisions as they advanced. Ludendorff&apos;s insistence on an advanced zone, The foremost shell-crater area to a depth of 500 to 1,000 yards was to be considered merely as an advanced zone (Vorfeld) and only to be occupied by a thin line of sentries with a few machine-guns. In the face of a big offensive these few troops were to retire on the main line of resistance (Hauptwiederstandslinie) at the back of this advanced zone, while the artillery were at one to lay down and maintain a dense barrage of shell in front of it. In the meantime the supports and reserves of the front-line divisions, and also the counter-attack divisions, would have been given time to move up towards this main line of resistance where the battle would be fought out, if the artillery had not already broken up the enemy&apos;s infantry in its movement across the advanced zone. There was, if possible, to be a counter-attack division behind each front-line division, but its counter-attack can only be successful if, with its units in good order, it reaches the enemy while he is still on the move or at least before he has had time to organise for defence the ground he has gained. Once this period, suitable for immediate counter-attack, has passed, the only course is to prepare for a methodical counter-attack, after ample artillery preparation, at some later time. (General von Kuhl) Der Weltkrieg III, p. 127 in Wynne, G.C. If Germany Attacks...., p. 309. was promulgated on 13 October. Artillery fire was to replace the machine-gun defence of the forward zone as far as possible. The thin line of sentries of one or two Gruppen (thirteen men and a light machine-gun each) in company sectors proved inadequate and at the end of October it was replaced by a conventional outpost system of double Gruppen. By this stage of the campaign the German defence was based on a unit of two divisions on a front of 2,500 yards, 8,000 yards deep; this was only half of the width that two divisions were thought to be able to hold and was caused by the weather, the devastating British artillery and the decline in the numbers and quality of German infantry. Camouflage, creating an invisible garrison (die Leere des Gefechtsfeldes) was emphasised to protect the divisions from British firepower by avoiding anything resembling a trench system, in favour of dispersal in crater fields. Such a method was only made feasible by the rapid rotation of units. Battalions of the front-division were relieved after two days and divisions every six days. { Wynne, If Germany Attacks...., pp. 311–312. } [ Battles of 3rd Ypres campaign ] [ Third phase, the rains return: 4 October—10 November ] The dry spell of late September and early October ended in the afternoon of 4 October { Terraine, J. The Road...., p. 278. } as the British consolidated their gains from that day&apos;s attack. The battles of Poelcappelle and the First Battle of Passchendaele were fought in conditions similar to those of August. A pause to repair roads and light railways up to the new front line and to wait for better weather to dry the ground was accepted as necessary by Haig on 13 October, despite the penalty it would bring in also allowing the Germans time to recover from their earlier defeats. { Terraine, J. The Road...., pp.301–302. } The crisis in Italy that broke on 24 October had a rapid effect on operations in Flanders. On 26 October, as the Second Battle of Passchendaele began, Lloyd George demanded that two British divisions be sent to Italy. On 27 October Haig ordered XIV Corps headquarters with 23rd and 41st Divisions to Italy, where they arrived on 16 November. On 28 October Haig protested to Robertson the Chief of the Imperial General Staff about the effect that transfers to Italy would have on operations in Flanders, only to be told to send more. { Edmonds,J. OH Italy, pp. 59–60. } On 8 November Haig chose XI Corps headquarters, 7th and 48th Divisions from the Ypres front to reinforce XIV Corps in Italy. X Corps with 5th and 21st Divisions, also from the Ypres front were chosen to be sent to Italy on 22 November, further depleting the offensive capacity of the Fifth and Second Armies at Ypres. { Edmonds, J. OH Italy, pp. 96–97. } British casualties 31 July—5 October were 159,259. { Terraine J. The Road...., p. 279. } Conditions were as bad for the Germans, &quot; The black day of 4 October was extraordinarily severe, and again we only came through it with enormous losses &quot;; { Flandern 1917 (1928) in Terraine, J. The Road...., p. 281 &amp; fn. } the manpower shortage was getting worse and the Supreme Command concluded that it was not possible to hold positions against the &quot; overpowering enemy superiority in artillery and infantry &quot;. { Der Weltkrieg in Terraine, The Road...., P. 281. } A German offensive in the Gheluvelt area was planned but was then cancelled due to lack of forces. On 11 October Crown Prince Rupprecht ordered that ground be sacrificed to conserve manpower; if necessary there would be a general withdrawal far enough to compel the Allies to redeploy their artillery. On 12 October Rupprecht wrote, &quot; Witterungsumschlag. Erfreulicherweise Regen, unser wirksamter Bundesgenosse. &quot; ( &quot; Break in the weather. Welcome rain, our strongest ally &quot;.) { Ruppreccht, II, 271 in Falls, C. The Great War 1914–1918 (1961) p. 302. } On 18 October General von Kuhl proposed a bigger withdrawal. Sixt von Armin the German Fourth Army commander and Lossberg, his Chief of Staff felt that they had no alternative but to hang on, since a withdrawal would abandon the last of the fortifications in the area and there was not time to build new ones further back where the ground was still passable in winter. { Der Weltkrieg in Terraine, J. The Road...., pp. 303–304. } On 21 October, Fourth Army reported 159,000 casualties from 1 July—10 October in the 63 divisions that had passed through the army, that morale was declining and that defensive operations could not prevent the Allies from gaining ground. { Der Weltkrieg in Terraine, J. The Road...., P. 306. } [ Battle of Poelcappelle: 9 October ] [ Battle of Poelcappelle ] After the calamity of 4 October, all of the German divisions holding front zones were relieved and an extra division brought forward (195th, 16th, 4th Bavarian, 18th, 227th, 240th, 187th and 22nd Reserve divisions). Without the forces necessary for a counter-offensive south of the ridges towards Kemmel Hill, Rupprecht began to plan for a slow withdrawal from Passchendaele even at the risk of uncovering German positions further north and on the coast. The attack on 9 October on a 13,500 yards frontage from south of Broodseinde to St Jansbeek, including 650 yards to the &apos;red line&apos; and 600—850 yards to the &apos;blue line&apos; by the 66th Division, (on its first operation) to the edge of Passchendaele and over 10 divisions of the French First Army and British 2nd and 5th Armies at Poelkapelle (or Poelcappelle to the British) led to heavy casualties on both sides, with minor advances in the north of the attack by exhausted troops. { Bean, AOH, vol iv, p. 887. } Birdwood later wrote,... there is little doubt that if the weather had held, and if we had been able to prepare and rehearse our advance as carefully as in the first three stages, we would have been able to take Passchendaele. But the weather defeated us. (Lt-Gen Birdwood, commander I ANZAC Corps, Memoirs.) Khaki and Gown, p. 316 in Terraine, J. The Road...., pp. 287–288. while Von Kuhl concluded that, 4 and 9 October were also days of severe fighting which stretched the German forces to their limit. The enemy succeeded in mounting repeated attacks and gradually forced the German front at Ypres back on a stretch about 33 km wide. The penetrations at their deepest were from five to seven kilometres. But the British had made no breakthrough.... On the German side it became even more difficult to procure the reserves to continue the defence. Von Kuhl, Der Weltkrieg, in Terraine, J. The Road to Passchendaele, p. 288. showing the great strain imposed on the defence even in conditions resembling August. [ First Battle of Passchendaele: 12 October ] [ First Battle of Passchendaele ] Aerial view of Passchendaele village before and after the battle. The First Battle of Passchendaele, on 12 October 1917 began with a further Allied attempt by 5 British and 3 ANZAC divisions (the New Zealand Division and the Australian 3rd and 4th Divisions) to gain ground around Passchendaele. The heavy rain again made movement difficult and artillery could not be brought closer to the front owing to the mud. The Allied troops were fought-out and morale was suffering. After a modest British advance the Germans (3rd Guard (Eingreif), 220th, 5th Bavarian Reserve, 24th, 40th and 15th divisions) counter-attacked, recovering most of the ground lost; the captured ground retained by the British was minimal and there were 13,000 Allied casualties. At a conference on 13 October Haig and the army commanders agreed that attacks would stop until the weather improved so that roads could be built to carry artillery and ammunition forward for better fire support. { Edmonds, J. OH 1917 II, p. 345. } On this day there were 2,735 New Zealand casualties, { Edmonds, J. OH 1917 II, pp. 341–342. } of which 45 officers and 800 men were either dead or lying mortally wounded between the lines. In lives lost in a day, this is the blackest day in New Zealand history. { Pugsley, C. The New Zealand Division at Passchendaele, p. 285, in (ed) Liddle, P. Passchendaele in Perspective (1997), ch 17. } [ Second Battle of Passchendaele: 26 Oct—10 November ] [ Second Battle of Passchendaele ] The four divisions of the Canadian Corps were transferred to the Ypres Salient to make additional advances on Passchendaele. { Bean 929 } The Canadian Corps relieved II Anzac Corps on 18 October from their positions along the valley between Gravenstafel Ridge and the heights at Passchendaele. { Nicholson p. 312. } The front line was mostly the same as the one occupied by the 1st Canadian Division in April 1915. The Canadian Corps operation was to be executed in a series of three attacks each with limited objectives, delivered at intervals of three or more days. As the Canadian Corps position was directly south of the inter-army boundary between the British Fifth and Second Armies, the British Fifth Army would mount subsidiary operations on the Canadian Corps&apos;s left flank while the I Anzac Corps would advance to protect the right flank. { Nicholson p. 314 } The dates of the phases were tentatively given as 26 October, 30 October and 6 November. The British Fifth Army undertook two minor operations on 22 October, one with the French First Army at Houthulst Forest, the other east of Poelcappelle. { Bean p. 930. } The objective of the attack was to maintain pressure on the Germans while the Canadian Corps prepared for their assault, as well as supporting the French attack at Malmaison. { Edmonds p. 347. } [ The attack consisted of units from XVIII Corps ( 18th Division ) and XIV Corps ( 34th and 35th Divisions), as well as units from the French I Corps ( 1st Division ). Edmonds p. 348. &quot; Note &quot; ] The attack commenced at 5:35  am, with the French 1st Division and the British 35th Division attacking towards the Houthulst Forest and the British 34th and 18th Divisions attacking from Poelcappelle. { Evans p. 133. } The French 1st Division covered the left flank of the attack towards the Houthulst Forest, while the British 35th Division initially managed to seize its first objectives but was forced back to its starting line by German counter-attacks. { Evans p. 134. } The left flank of the attack by the British 34th Division was unsuccessful, while the right flank managed to keep up with the attacking forces of the British 18th Division. Terrain through which the Canadian Corps advanced at Passchendaele in late 1917 The first stage began on the morning of 26 October. { Wolff p. 246. } The 3rd Canadian Division was assigned the northern flank which included the sharply rising ground of the Bellevue spur. South of the Ravebeek creek, the 4th Canadian Division would take Decline Copse which straddled the Ypres-Roulers railway. { Nicholson p. 318. } The 3rd Canadian Division captured Wolf Copse and secured its objective line but was ultimately forced to drop a defensive flank to link up with the adjacent division of the British Fifth Army. The 4th Canadian Division initially captured all its objectives but gradually retreated from Decline Copse due to German counter-attacks and mis-communications between the Canadian and Australian units to the south. { Nicholson p. 320. } The second stage began on 30 October and was intended to capture the position not captured during the previous stage and gain a base for the final assault on Passchendaele. The southern flank was to capture the strongly held Crest Farm while the northern flank was to capture the hamlet of Meetcheele as well as the Goudberg area near the Canadian Corps&apos;s northern boundary. { Nicholson p. 321. } The southern flank quickly captured Crest Farm and sent patrols beyond its objective line and into Passchendaele. The northern flank again met with exceptional German resistance. The 3rd Canadian Division captured Vapour Farm at the corps&apos;s boundary, Furst Farm to the west of Meetcheele and the crossroads at Meetcheele but remained short of its objective line. To permit time for inter-divisional relief, there was a seven day pause between the second and third stages. The British Second Army was ordered to take over a section of the British Fifth Army front adjoining the Canadian Corps so that the central portion of the assault could proceed under a single command. { Nicholson p. 323. } Three consecutive rainless days between 3 and 5 November aided logistical preparations and reorganization of the troops for the next stage. [ http://www.cwgc.org/ypres/content.asp?id%3D252%26amp%3Bmenu%3Dsubsub The Ypres Salient 8 February 2009 Second Passchendaele Commonwealth War Graves Commission n.d. ] The third stage began on the morning of 6 November with the 1st and 2nd Canadian Division s having taken over the front, relieving the 3rd and 4th Canadian Divisions respectively. Less than three hours after the start of the assault, many units had reached their final objectives and the village of Passchendaele had been captured. The Canadian Corps launched a final action on 10 November to gain control of the remaining high ground north of the village, in the vicinity of Hill 52. { Nicholson p. 325. } This attack on 10 November brought to an end the long drawn-out battle. [ http://www.lac-bac.gc.ca/webarchives/20071115102304/ http://www.dfait-maeci.gc.ca/canada-europa/brussels/passchendaele/battle-en.asp Canada and the Battle of Passchendaele 15 November 2007 Canadian Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade 19 October 2007 ] Hindenburg later wrote: &quot; It was with a feeling of absolute longing that we waited for the beginning of the wet season. As previous experience had taught us, great stretches of the Flemish flats would then become impassable.... This battle, too, must finally stick in the mud, even though English stubbornness kept it up longer than otherwise. &quot; { Hindenburg,P. The Great War, p. 156 (1920) Ed, Messenger, C. 2006 } German troops engaged were from 239th, 39th, 4th, 44th Reserve, 7th, 11th, 11th Bavarian, 238th, 199th, 27th, 185th, 111th and 40th divisions. [ Western Front ] [ Battle of Malmaison: 23 October—2 November ] [ Second Battle of the Aisne ] After numerous requests from Haig, Petain launched the Battle of La Malmaison, the long-delayed French attack on the Chemin des Dames, by Maistre&apos;s French Sixth Army. The artillery preparation started on 17 October which was four months later than Petain&apos;s original commitment to Haig. Haig commented, &quot; The French did well yesterday... If the French had only made this attack 6 weeks ago, it would have had a much more decisive effect. &quot;. { Haig letter 24 October in Terraine, J. The Road.... p. 307. } The attack led to the capture the town of La Malmaison and control of the Chemin des Dames ridge. The French artillery preparation was massive and well coordinated. When troops from the 11th, 14th and 21st Army Corps attacked on a front of 7 1/2 miles, protected by a creeping barrage, the Germans were swiftly defeated, losing 11,157 prisoners and 180 guns. 63 Tanks were used, 21 reaching the second objective despite muddy conditions, in an attack coordinated with the infantry. The French advanced up to 6  km. The Germans had to withdraw from the plateau of the Chemin des Dames 1—2 November and move to the north of the Ailette Valley; it cost the French 11,863 casualties 23—26 October. { Terraine, J. The Road.... p. 307. } [ Aftermath ] [ Western Front ] [ Battle of Cambrai (1917) ] At an army commanders&apos; conference on 13 October Haig mentioned a scheme being prepared by Byng&apos;s British Third Army for mid-November. Byng wanted the operatons at Ypres to continue so as to hold German troops in Flanders. { Edmonds, J. OH 1917 II, pp. 345–246. } The Battle of Cambrai began on 20 November when the British breached the first two parts of the Hindenburg Line in the first successful mass use of tank s in a combined arms operation. { Harris pp. 124–125. } The experience of the failure to contain the British attacks at Ypres and the drastic reduction in areas of the western front which could be considered &apos;quiet&apos;, after the tank and artillery surprise at Cambrai { Sheldon, J. The German Army at Cambrai, p. 312. } left the German Oberste Heeresleitung with little choice but to stake all on offensive action early in 1918. The German Operation Michael began on 21 March 1918 and the supporting Battle of the Lys on 9 April. In the space of three days, the Germans reoccupied almost all of the ground taken by the Allies during the Battle of Passchendaele, after the British shortened the line there to release troops for operations to the south. The Germans were easily pushed away from Ypres in the Fifth Battle of Ypres on 28 September 1918. [ Italy ] [ Battle of Caporetto ] On 24 October, The Austro-German 14th Army, under General der Infanterie Otto von Below, attacked the Italian Second Army on the Isonzo at the Battle of Caporetto; in 18 days Italy lost 650,000 men and 3,000 guns. { Miles, W. OH 1917 III, p. 15. } In fear that Italy might be put out of the war, the French and British Governments each promised to send six divisions to the Italian Front. { Bean pp. 935–936. } British and French troops were swiftly moved between 10 November and 12 December, due to good administrative preparations made by Ferdinand Foch, who had been sent to Italy in April 1917 to plan for such an emergency and who was now French Chief of Staff. { Nicholson p. 331. } The parallel diversion of resources from the BEF forced Haig to conclude the 3rd Battle of Ypres, much to his dissatisfaction, just short of Westrozebeke. { Bean p. 936. } [ Casualties ] Various casualty figures have been published, although the highest estimates for both British and German casualties appear to be discredited. In the British Official History (1948), Brigadier-General James E. Edmonds put British losses at 244,897 but claimed that German figures were not available. He estimated German losses at 400,000. C.R.M.F Cruttwell in A History of the Great War, 1914–1918 assessed British casualties at 300,000 and German losses at 400,000. A. J. P. Taylor wrote that the Official History had performed a &quot; conjuring trick &quot; on these figures and that no one believed these &quot; farcical calculations. &quot; Taylor put British losses at 300,000 and German losses at 200,000. { Taylor 1972. } In 2007 { Sheldon, J. The German Army at Passchendaele (2007), p. 313-315. } Jack Sheldon also rejected Edmonds&apos;s calculations, suggesting that although the German figures (just under 220,000) were available (in Volume III of their history) Edmonds may not have included them as they did not fit his case. Sheldon stated that a figure of 400,000 could only be obtained by including all lightly wounded men, even those fit for immediate return to duty, (which was the British method of counting casualties, hence the basis for the British Official Historian&apos;s case that 30% must be added to German figures to make them comparable). { Edmonds, J. OH 1916 I &amp; OH 1917 II } { Sheldon pp. 312–5. } Cyril Falls in The Great War 1914–1918, estimated 240,000 British, 8,525 French and 260,000 German casualties. { Falls, C. ibid, p. 303. (1959,1961 edn) } In his book Haig, the Educated Soldier, John Terraine put British losses at a similar level but also did not accept that German losses were as high as 400,000. In Road to Paschendaele, Terraine argued that 20% needed to be added to the German figures to include some lightly wounded men who would have been included under British definitions of casualties, bringing estimated German casualties to 260,400. { Terraine pp. 344–5. } Leon Wolff, a critic of Haig, claimed German casualties were 270,713 and British 448,614 but the latter figure was refuted by Terraine, who pointed out that despite stating that this was the total figure for the second half of 1917, Wolff had neglected either to deduct the 75,681 British casualties for Cambrai given in the Official Statistics from which he was quoting or to make any deduction for &quot; normal wastage &quot;, casualties averaging 35,000 per month suffered in periods when there was no major offensive, e.g., the first thirty days of July or the latter part of December. Prior and Wilson in Passchendaele (1997) give British losses as 275,000 (with soldiers permanently lost to death or severe wounds equivalent to 10–12 divisions) and German casualties just under 200,000. { Prior &amp; Wilson p. 195. } In Forgotten Victory (2002) Gary Sheffield wrote that Richard Holmes&apos;s 260,000 apiece seemed about right. { Sheffield, G. Forgotten Victory, The First World War: myths and realities, p. 216, (2002). } In his biography of Haig (2011) he did not offer figures for either side, { Sheffield, G. The Chief, Douglas Haig and the British Army, (2011). } leaving the verdict to General von Kuhl, &quot; The sacrifices that the British made for the Entente were fully justified. &quot;, noted by Sheldon (2007). { Sheffield, G. The Chief, Douglas Haig and the British Army, (2011), p. 248 and fn 101, p. 439. } Heinz Hagenlucke gave &quot; about 217,000 &quot; German army casualties. { Hagenlucke, H. The German High Command, p. 55 in Liddle, P.Passchendaele in Perspective, ch 4 pp. 45–58. } Two poets, Irishman Francis Ledwidge, 25, of 1st Battalion, Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers, in 29th Division, and Hedd Wyn, a Welsh-language poet serving with the Royal Welsh Fusiliers at Pilckem Ridge, were both killed in action on 31 July. Adolf Hitler fought in the 5th Battle of Ypres (near Passchendaele) in 1918 as a member of the 6th Bavarian Reserve Division and was injured on 13–14 October 1918, when he was caught in a British gas attack on a hill south of Werwick. { Ian Kershaw, } { Hitler 1889-1936: Hubris, ( } { Norton, 2000), pp. 96-7. } [ Conclusion ] A German General Staff publication claimed &quot; Germany had been brought near to certain destruction (sicheren untergang) by the Flanders battle of 1917. &quot; In his memoirs (1938) Lloyd George wrote, &quot; Passchendaele was indeed one of the greatest disasters of the war.... No soldier of any intelligence now defends this senseless campaign.... &quot;. Paddy Griffith wrote, The British fought and won Third Ypres by virtue of the dominance of their artillery and the endurance of their infantry. Despite the awful conditions and the various tactical surprises that their enemy continued to spring, the &apos;bite and hold&apos; system kept on moving doggedly forward until it finally ran out of momentum in November. The gains from each &apos;bite&apos; were not perhaps spectacular, and Haig certainly continued to be impatient for bigger breakthroughs and greater mobility almost up to the end. Nevertheless, by this time the BEF had developed a workable system of offensive tactics against which the Germans ultimately had no answer. Passchendaele in Perspective, Ed Liddle; ch 5, Griffith, P., p. 71. G. C. Wynne wrote that the British had eventually reached Passchendaele Ridge and captured Flandern I; beyond them was Flandern II and nearing completion Flandern III. The German submarine bases on the coast remained but the objective of diverting the Germans from the French further south, while they recovered from the failure of the Nivelle Offensive in April had succeeded. { Wynne, G. C. If Germany Attacks.... (1976 edn) pp. 214–315. } [ Commemoration ] Tyne Cot Commonwealth War Graves Cemetery and Memorial to the Missing. The Menin Gate Memorial to the Missing commemorates those of all Commonwealth nations, except New Zealand, who died in the Ypres Salient and have no known grave. In the case of the United Kingdom only casualties before 16 August 1917 are commemorated on the memorial. United Kingdom and New Zealand servicemen who died after that date are named on the memorial at Tyne Cot Cemetery. There are numerous tributes and memorials all over Australia and New Zealand to ANZAC soldiers who died in the battle, including plaques at the Christchurch and Dunedin railway stations. { New Zealand History. } The Canadian Corps&apos; participation in the Second Battle of Passchendaele is commemorated with the Passchendaele Memorial located at the former site of the Crest Farm on the southwest fringe of Passchendaele village. { Vance p. 66. } One of the newest monuments to be dedicated to the fighting contribution of a group is the Celtic Cross memorial commemorating the Scottish contributions and efforts in the fighting in Flanders during the Great War. This memorial is located on the Frezenberg Ridge where the Scottish 9th and 15th Divisions, as part of the British Army, fought during the Battle of Passchendaele. The monument was dedicated by the Scottish Parliament&apos;s Minister for Europe Linda Fabiani during the late summer of 2007, the 90th anniversary of the battle. [ Notes ] [ &quot; Note &quot; ] [ Footnotes ] [ 4 ] [ References ] [ Reference-Albertini The Origins of the War of 1914 III Albertini L. 2005 Enigma Books New York 1-929631-33-2 ] [ Reference-Aspinall Military Operations Gallipoli I (Inception of the Campaign to May 1915) Aspinall-Oglander C. F. 1929 Heinemann London B0043KK91S ] [ Reference-Balck Development of tactics, World War Balck W. 2008 Kessinger Montana 1-4368-2099-5 ] [ Reference-Bean The Official History of Australia in the War of 1914–1918: Volume IV: The A.I.F. in France 1917 Bean C.E.W. Charles Bean 1941 Halstead Press Pty Limited Sydney 11th ] [ Reference-Boraston Eighth Division in War 1914–1918 Boraston J.H. Bax Cyril E.O. 1999 1926 The Naval &amp; Military Press 1-897632-67-3 ] [ Reference-Boraston1 Sir Douglas Haig&apos;s Despatches (December 1915 – April 1919) Boraston J.H. 1920 Dent London ] [ Reference-Carlyon The Great War Carlyon L. 2006 Pan Macmillan Aus 978-1-4050-3799-0 ] [ Reference-Cook Cook Tim No Place to Run: The Canadian Corps and Gas Warfare in the First World War http://books.google.ca/books?id%3DRCMXjVpj9xYC%26amp%3Blpg%3DPP1%26amp%3Bdq%3DNo%20Place%20to%20Run%3A%20The%20Canadian%20Corps%20and%20Gas%20Warfare%20in%20the%20First%20World%20War%26amp%3Bpg%3DPP1#v%3Donepage%26amp%3Bq%26amp%3Bf%3Dtrue Vancouver University of British Columbia Press 2000 0-7748-0740-7 ] [ Reference-Cruttwell A History of the Great War 1914*1918 Cruttwell C.R.M.F. 1982 Granada London 0-586-08398-7 ] [ Check digit (2) does not correspond to calculated figure. ] [ Reference-Doughty Pyrrhic Victory : French Strategy and Operations in the Great War Doughty R. A. 2005 Belknap Harvard Cambridge Mass 0-674-01880-X ] [ Reference-Ward The Fifty Sixth Division 1914–1918 (1st London Territorial Division) Dudley Ward C. H. 1921 Naval and Military Press (2001 reprint) Uckfield 1-84342-111-9 ] [ Reference-Edmonds1 Military Operations France and Belgium 1914 II (Antwerp, La Bassée, Armentieres, Messines and Ypres, October–November 1914) Edmonds J. 1929 Battery Press (1992 reprint) Nashville 1-870423-55-0 ] [ Reference-Edmonds2 Military Operations France and Belgium 1915 I (Winter 1915 : Battle of Neuve Chapelle : Battle of Ypres) Edmonds, J. E. &amp; Wynne, G. C. 1927 Battery Press (1995 reprint) Nashville 0-89839-218-7 ] [ Reference-Edmonds3 Military Operations France and Belgium 1915 II (Battles of Aubers Ridge, Festubert, and Loos) Edmonds J. E. 1928 Macmillan London B000ZNXZV8 ] [ Reference-Edmonds4 Military Operations France and Belgium, 1916 I (Sir Douglas Haig&apos;s Command to the 1st July : Battle of the Somme) Edmonds J. 1932 Battery Press (1993 reprint) Nashville 0-89839-185-7 ] [ Reference-Edmonds5 Military Operations France and Belgium 1917 II. 7 June—10 November. Messines and Third Ypres (Passchendaele) Edmonds James James Edward Edmonds 1948 The Battery Press (1991 reprint) Nashville 0-89839-166-0 ] [ Reference-Edmonds6 Military Operations Italy 1915–1919 Edmonds J. 1949 Battery Press (1991 reprint) Nashville 0-89839-165-2 ] [ Reference-Edmonds7 Military Operations France and Belgium 1916 Volume I Appendices Edmonds J. E. 1932 N &amp; M Press Uckfield (2010 reprint) 1-84574-730-5 ] [ Reference-Edmonds8 Military Operations France &amp; Belgium 1917 I Appendices Edmonds, J. E. &amp; Wynne, G. C. 1940 N &amp; M Press (2010 reprint) Uckfield 1-84574-733-X ] [ Reference-Evans Passchendaele: The Hollow Victory Evans Martin Marix 2005 Pen and Sword Books London 1-84415-368-1 ] [ Reference-Falls The Great War 1914–1918 Falls C. 1961 Perigee London 0-399-50100-2 ] [ Check digit (3) does not correspond to calculated figure. ] [ Reference-Freeman A Planned Massacre? : British Intelligence Analysis and the German Army at the Battle of Broodseinde, 4 October 1917 Freeman J. 2011 Unpublished PhD Birmingham University http://etheses.bham.ac.uk/3037/ ] [ Reference-Griffith Battle tactics of the Western Front : The British Army&apos;s Art of Attack 1916–18 Griffith P. 1996 Yale University Press New Haven &amp; London 0-300-06663-5 ] [ Reference-Groom A Storm in Flanders: The Ypres Salient, 1914–1918 Tragedy and Triumph on the Western Front http://books.google.ca/books?id%3DkSAT6W2nPZgC%26amp%3Blpg%3DPP1%26amp%3Bdq%3DA%20Storm%20in%20Flanders%3A%20The%20Ypres%20Salient%2C%201914-1918%26amp%3Bpg%3DPP1#v%3Donepage%26amp%3Bq%26amp%3Bf%3Dtrue Groom Winston 2002 Atlantic Monthly Press New York 0-87113-842-5 ] [ Reference-Hamilton The War Diary of the Master of Belhaven Hamilton R 1990 Wharncliffe Barnsley 1-871647-04-5 ] [ Reference-Harris Men, ideas, and tanks: British military thought and armoured forces, 1903–1939 http://books.google.ca/books?id%3D00myJhLVIUUC%26amp%3Blpg%3DPP1%26amp%3Bdq%3DMen%2C%20ideas%2C%20and%20tanks%3A%20British%20military%20thought%20and%20armoured%20forces%2C%201903-1939%26amp%3Bpg%3DPP1#v%3Donepage%26amp%3Bq%26amp%3Bf%3Dtrue Harris J. P. 1995 Manchester University Press Manchester 0-790-3762-1 ] [ Reference-Harris2 Douglas Haig and the First World War Harris J. P. 2008 CUP Cambridge 978-0-521-89802-7 ] [ Reference-Hart Passchendaele: the Sacrificial Ground Hart Peter Steel Nigel 2001 Cassell &amp; Co London 0-304-35975-0 ] [ Reference-Headlam History of the Guards Division in the Great War 1915–1918 Headlam C. 1924 Naval &amp; Military Press (2010 reprint) Uckfield 1-84342-124-0 ] [ Reference-Henniker Transportation on the Western Front 1914–1918 Henniker A. M. 1937 N &amp; M Press Uckfield (2009 pb reprint) 978-1-84574-765-7 ] [ Reference-Humphries Germany&apos;s Western front : Translations From the German Official History of the Great War Volume II: 1915 Humphries, M. O. &amp; Maker, J. (eds) 2010 WLUP Ontario 978-1-55458-259-4 ] [ Reference-Jones The War in the Air : Being the part played in the Great War by the Royal Air Force Vol. IV Jones H. A. 1934 N &amp; M Press (2002 reprint) Uckfield 1-84342-415-0 ] [ Reference-Keegan The First World War Keegan John John Keegan 1998 Pimlico London 0-7126-6645-1 ] [ Reference-Kincaid-Smith The 25th Division in France and Flanders Kincaid-Smith M. 1918 N &amp; M Press (2010 reprint) Uckfield 1-84342-123-2 ] [ Leach Leach Norman &apos;Passchendaele – Canada&apos;s Other Vimy Ridge http://www.journal.forces.gc.ca/vo9/no2/09-leach-eng.asp Canadian Military Journal 9 2 73–82 Department of National Defence 2009 ] [ Reference-Liddell Hart History of the First World War Liddell Hart B. H. 1976 Pan Books London 0-330-23354-8 ] [ Reference-Liddle Passchendaele in Perspective : The Third Battle of Ypres Liddle P. H. 1997 Pen &amp; Sword London 0-85052-588-8 ] [ Reference-Malkasian A history of modern wars of attrition http://books.google.ca/books?id%3DXxu2iEEKi-IC%26amp%3Blpg%3DPP1%26amp%3Bdq%3DA%20history%20of%20modern%20wars%20of%20attrition%26amp%3Bpg%3DPP1#v%3Donepage%26amp%3Bq%26amp%3Bf%3Dtrue Malkasian Carter 2002 Praeger Westport 0-275-97379-4 ] [ Reference-Massie Castles of Steel : Britain, Germany and the Winning of the Great War at Sea Massie R. K. 2005 Pimlico London 1-84413-411-3 ] [ Reference-Messenger Call to Arms Messenger C. 2006 Cassell London 0-304-36722-2 ] [ Reference-Miles Military Operations France and Belgium 1917 III : The Battle of Cambrai Miles Wilfrid 1948 Battery Press (1991 reprint) Nashville 0-89839-162-8 ] [ Reference-Nicholson Official History of the Canadian Army in the First World War: Canadian Expeditionary Force 1914–1919 Nicholson Gerald W. L. 1962 Queen&apos;s Printer and Controller of Stationary Ottawa http://www.cmp-cpm.forces.gc.ca/dhh-dhp/his/docs/CEF_e.pdf ] [ Reference-Pedersen The Anzacs : Gallipoli to the Western Front Pedersen P 2010 Penguin Aus 0-14-300846-3 ] [ Reference-Prior Passchendaele: The Untold Story Prior Robin Wilson Trevor 1998 Yale University Press Cumberland 0-300-07227-9 ] [ Reference-Robbins British generalship on the Western Front 1914–18: Defeat into Victory http://books.google.com/?id%3DqgO2rDvdOq4C%26amp%3Blpg%3DPP1%26amp%3Bdq%3DBritish%20generalship%20on%20the%20Western%20Front%201914-18%3A%26amp%3Bpg%3DPP1#v%3Donepage%26amp%3Bq%26amp%3Bf%3Dtrue Robbins Simon 2005 Frank Cass Abingdon 0-415-35006-9 ] [ Reference-Rogers Landrecies to Cambrai : Case Studies of German Offensive and Defensive Operations on the Western Front 1914–17 Rogers (ed.) Duncan 2010 Helion Solihull 978-1-906033-76-7 ] [ Reference-Samuels Command or Control? : Command, Training and Tactics in the British and German Armies, 1888–1918 Samuels Martin 2003 Frank Cass London 0-7146-4214-2 ] [ Reference-Sheffield The Chief : Douglas Haig and the British Army Sheffield G. 2011 Aurum Press London 978-1-84513-691-8 ] [ Reference-Sheffield &amp; Todman Command and Control on the Western Front : The British Army&apos;s Experience 1914–18 Sheffield, G. &amp; Todman, D. 2004 Spellmount Ltd Staplehurst 1-86227-083-X ] [ Reference-Sheldon The German Army at Passchendaele Sheldon Jack 2007 Pen and Sword Books London 1-84415-564-1 ] [ Reference-Sheldon1 The German Army at Cambrai Sheldon J. 2009 Pen &amp; Sword Barnsley 978-1-84415-944-4 ] [ Reference-Simpson The Operational Role of British Corps Command on the Western Front 1914–18 Simpson A. 2001 London London B001OQ0YMS ] [ Reference-Snowden British 21st Infantry Division on the Western Front 1914–1918 : A Case Study in Tactical Evolution Snowden K.L. 2001 Birmingham University Department of Modern History *School of Historical Studies http://etheses.bham.ac.uk/21/1/Snowden01MPhil.pdf ] [ Reference-Stevenson 1914–1918 The History of the First World War Stevenson D. 2005 Penguin London 0-14-026817-0 ] [ Reference-Taylor The First World War. An Illustrated History Taylor A.J.P. A.J.P. Taylor 1972 Perigee Trade New York ISBN 0-399-50260-2 ] [ Reference-Terraine The Road to Passchendaele: The Flanders Offensive 1917, A Study in Inevitability Terraine J. John Terraine 1984 Leo Cooper London 0-436-51732-9 ] [ Reference-Terraine1 Business in Great Waters Terraine J. 1999 Wordsworth Editions Ware 1-84022-201-8 ] [ Reference-Terraine2 Douglas Haig : The Educated Soldier Terraine J. 2005 Cassell London 0-304-35319-1 ] [ Check digit (9) does not correspond to calculated figure. ] [ Reference-War Histories of Two Hundred and Fifty-one Divisions of the German Army which Participated in the War (1914–1918) United States Army, American Expeditionary Forces, Intelligence Section 1920 Government Print Office Washington 5-87296-917-1 ] [ Reference-Wolff In Flanders Fields: The 1917 Campaign http://books.google.ca/books?id%3DTezy3pRhdzYC%26amp%3Blpg%3DPP1%26amp%3Bdq%3DIn%20Flanders%20Fields%3A%20The%201917%20Campaign%26amp%3Bpg%3DPP1#v%3Donepage%26amp%3Bq%26amp%3Bf%3Dtrue Wolff Leon 1958 Viking New York 978-0-14-014662-2 ] [ Reference-Wise Canadian Airmen and the First Word War : The Official History of the Royal Canadian Air Force Wise S. F. 1981 University of Toronto Press Toronto 0-8020-2379-7 ] [ Reference-Wynne If Germany Attacks : The Battle in Depth in the West Wynne G. C. 1976 Greenwood Press Connecticut 0-8371-5029-9 ] [ External links ] [ World War I ] [ Third Battle of Ypres ] Passchendaele – The Final Call – Poem and biography of Captain James Willard Passchendaele Original reports from The Times Battles: The Third Battle of Ypres, 1917 Westhoek The great war in Flanders Fields – A war and peace experience. Second Lieutenant Robert Riddel, Military Cross, 10th Battalion Argyll &amp; Sutherland Highlanders, Passchendaele, 12 October 1917 Guernsey students re-trace a soldier&apos;s journey to Passchendaele for Radiowaves (2007) Robert Hall &quot; Uncovering the secrets of Ypres &quot; 23 February 2007. BBC News, Belgium The Battle of Passchendaele Day by day detailed description of battle (with maps). Category:Conflicts in 1917 Category:1917 in Belgium Category:Battles of World War I involving Australia Category:Battles of World War I involving Canada Category:Battles of World War I involving France Category:Battles of World War I involving Germany Category:Battles of World War I involving New Zealand Category:Battles of World War I involving South Africa Category:Battles of World War I involving the United Kingdom Category:Battles of the Western Front (World War I) Category:Ypres Category:Passchendaele Category:Battle honours of the Rifle Brigade [ de ] cs:Třetí bitva u Yper cy:Brwydr Passchendaele da:3.Ypres de:Dritte Flandernschlacht fr:Bataille de Passchendaele ko:파스샹달 전투 io:Triesma Ypres-batalio it:Battaglia di Passchendaele hu:Harmadik ypres-i csata nl:Derde Slag om Ieper ja:パッシェンデールの戦い no:Slaget ved Passchendaele pl:Bitwa pod Passchendaele pt:Terceira Batalha de Ypres ro:Bătălia de la Passchendaele ru:Битва при Пашендейле simple:Battle of Passchendaele sr:Битка код Пашендала fi:Passchendaelen taistelu sv:Slaget vid Passchendaele vls:Slag om Passchendoale