[ February 2011 ] [ Masvingo Province City, Towns, Villages, Province Great-Zimbabwe-2.jpg 300px Great Zimbabwe ruins, found in the province. Province of Masvingo.svg 125px Map of Zimbabwe with the province highlighted Masvingo Elections08.gif 150px Masvingo constituency seats for the 2008 elections 150 Country Zimbabwe Province Masvingo Capital Masvingo Governor Willard Anas Chiwewe ( ZANU-PF ) Provincial Administrator Felix Chikoo Established late 19th century 56,566 km² 2002 estimate ( UN ) 1,300,000 (1m in &apos;82) CET +2 CEST +2 ] Masvingo is a Province in Zimbabwe found in the south-eastern section of the landlocked country. It borders Mozambique on its eastern border and the provinces of Matabeleland South to the south, Midlands to the north and west and Manicaland to the north east. { High Resolution Map of Masvingo Province } It was called Victoria Province before 1982. [ History ] The town was founded in 1890 and was the first large settlement to be established by the Pioneer Column of the BSAC which makes it the oldest town in Zimbabwe. It was named Fort Victoria after Queen Victoria. The province is largely populated by members of the Karanga tribe, who are the most populous tribe in Zimbabwe, and are a sub-group of the Shona speaking tribes that also include the Zezuru, Manyika and Ndau. Masvingo province, known before 1982 as Victoria province, is in the drier lowveldt area in the south of Zimbabwe. The boundaries were changed slightly in the 1980s. From white settlement until 2000 most of the area was devoted to cattle ranching, with mining and sugar cane growing (irrigated from Mutirikwi ), and communal areas where subsistence farming is carried out. With the land reforms of the early 21st century large scale cattle and mixed farms are being redistributed to small farmers. [ Geography ] { Beitbridge &amp; } { Masvingo, 2006 } Masvingo (formerly Fort Victoria) is the capital of the province. Chiredzi and Triangle are other major towns in the province. [ Population ] Despite the aridness, the residents of the province are proud tillers of the earth and like most Nguni tribes in Southern Africa they practise animal husbandry to supplement their diets. In fact, like the rest of the country, their most prized possessions are cattle, which patriarchs demand as lobola, bride-price (dowry), in return for the hand of their daughters in marriage. The status of men in the villages in the province is assessed according to the number of cattle they possess - those with no cattle are not considered men. Cattle owners were dismayed during the drought of 1992 when then 90 percent of the cattle in the province died of famine. { Cattle Ruslting (accessed 17 February 2008) } The province has an area of 56,566  km² and a population of approximately 1.3 million (2002). The Karanga form a majority in the province. In Chiredzi District, there are communities of Shangani people while those of the Ndebele are found on the western edge of the province. To the north-east, are found the Ndau. The white population has declined continuously since independence, heightened during the invasions of white commercial farms in 2000. In fact, the first farm invasion occurred in Masvingo Province and the rest of the country followed suit. [ Climate ] Masvingo province is located in the low veld of the country where rainfall is minimal and uncertain. a large of the southern part of the province is drought prone, set as region 5 in the country&apos;s climatic regions. Most parts of the province, therefore, are generally unfit for agriculture, apart from cattle ranching. Masvingo have most of the educated population in Zimbabwe. { Millions in need of food aid (accessed 17 February 2008) } { Experiment success (accessed 17 February 2008) } { Harsh Times (accessed 17 February 2008) } Hippo Valley estates in Chiredzi and Triangle use the water from Lake Kyle for irrigation. [ Topography ] The province is dominated by the Save, Runde, Mwenezi and Limpopo river systems which all either join or drain directly into the Indian Ocean. The only notable mountain range is the Chimanimani Mountain Range in the east. Kopjes, grey and bald in the hot sun, dot the countryside. Mopane trees, drought tolerant and sturdy, are found throughout the province. The busy A1 highway connects the major centers of Masvingo and Beitbridge. [ Government ] The province&apos;s leader is a governor appointed by the country&apos;s president for a five year term of office. The province also sends six elected members to the Senate plus a number of chiefs. In addition, twenty six members of parliament, selected from the province&apos;s seven districts, are sent to the House of Assembly. Districts of Masvingo [ Districts ] The districts are run by the rural district councils, which are composed of members elected from the wards in the district.Masvingo is divided into 7 administrative districts, although these can be further divided by the delimitation committee during elections depending on population figures. The districts are Bikita, Chivi, Zaka and Masvingo in the center of the province, Gutu in the north, and Mwenezi, and Chiredzi in the south and east respectively. All these seven districts have business centres known as growth points and they are as follows with estimation of distance from Masvingo city centre: Masvingo- Nemanwa (30  km), Bikita- Nyika (82  km), Zaka- Jerera (96  km), Gutu- Mpandawana (94  km). [ Elections ] Masvingo was generally regarded as a stronghold of ZANU-PF, the ruling party. In the last parliamentary elections of 2005, ZANU-PF won all but one district of the fourteen seats up for grabs. { Zimbabwe Election Commission } In the upcoming election of March, 2008 the seven districts have been cut to produce 26 constituencies. { Mbeki In Zimbabwe } Typical bus station scene in districts scattered across the province. At every bus station along the highway is found a retail shop. [ Attractions ] The province has a number of attractions. In the east of the province along the Mozambique border is Gonarezhou National Park, part of the Gaza, Kruger and Gonarezhou Transfrontier National Park concept. Less than an hour away to the east lies the world famous stone ruins of Great Zimbabwe National Monument, from which Zimbabwe draws its name. A little closer to the stone ruins is Lake Kyle, a huge body of water where people spend time engaged in recreational actives in Mutirikwi Recreational Park. Tourism is a major contributor to the province&apos;s GDP, as is agriculture. [ Personalities ] [ May 2010 ] The province has produced a number of illustrious figures in the history of the country. Famous sons of the province include :- Zimbabwe&apos;s first vice-president, nationalist and founding father of Zimbabwe, Simon Muzenda; { Obituary: } { Simon Muzenda (accessed 17 February 2008) } Harvard trained lawyer, nationalist and politician Edson Zvobgo, Nationalist Crispen Mandizvidza, ambassador Stanslaus Mudenge and Alois Chidoda; Member Of Parliament Shuvai Mahova; Chief Air-Marshall Josiah Tungamirai; Governor Josiah Hungwe. { ZANU-PF } { Mukonoweshuro. (accessed 17 February 2008) } The popular singer, Paul Matavire, aka Dr. Love was from Mwenezi, while Gen. Vitalis Zvinavashe, the second supreme commander of the Zimbabwe Defence Forces, is from Gutu, Emmerson Dambudzo Mnangagwa who was raised in Chivi. [ Image gallery ] Homestead Magomana Flame Lily Nyala Tree Manyuchi Cattle Manyuchi Maranda Mwenezi Villagers Kopje A1 Highway Masvingo Motorist Beitbridge Highway Rutenga Scene [ See also ] Provinces of Zimbabwe Districts of Zimbabwe [ References ] [ External links ] Lake Kyle Recreational Park Zimbabwean Online Community [ 21 00 S 31 00 E title region:ZW_type:adm1st_source:GNS-enwiki ] [ September 2010 ] Category:Provinces of Zimbabwe af:Masvingo (provinsie) be-x-old:Масьвінга (правінцыя) bg:Масвинго da:Masvingo (provins) de:Masvingo (Provinz) et:Masvingo provints es:Provincia de Masvingo eu:Masvingoko probintzia fr:Province de Masvingo ko:마싱고 주 id:Provinsi Masvingo it:Provincia di Masvingo mrj:Масвинго (провинци) nl:Masvingo (provincie) ja:マシンゴ州 no:Masvingo (provins) pl:Masvingo (prowincja) pt:Masvingo ro:Provincia Masvingo ru:Масвинго (провинция) sr:Машвинго fi:Masvingo sv:Masvingo tr:Masvingo zh:馬斯溫戈省