[ the thoroughbred racehorse Nearctic (horse) ] The Nearctic is one of the nine terrestrial ecozone s dividing the Earth&apos;s land surface. The Nearctic Ecozone The Nearctic ecozone covers most of North America, including Greenland and the highlands of Mexico. Southern Mexico, southern Florida, Central America, and the Caribbean islands are part of the Neotropic ecozone, together with South America. [ Major ecological regions ] The World Wildlife Fund (WWF) divides the Nearctic into four Bioregions, defined as &quot; geographic clusters of ecoregions that may span several habitat types, but have strong biogeographic affinities, particularly at taxonomic levels higher than the species level (genus, family). &quot; [ Canadian Shield ] The Canadian Shield bioregion extends across the northern portion of the continent, from the Aleutian Islands to Newfoundland. It includes the Nearctic&apos;s Arctic Tundra and Boreal forest ecoregions. In terms of floristic province s, it is represented by part of the Canadian Province of the Circumboreal Region. [ Eastern North America ] The Eastern North America bioregion includes the Temperate broadleaf and mixed forests of the eastern United States and southeastern Canada, the Great Plains temperate grasslands of the central United States and south-central Canada, and the Temperate coniferous forests of the southeastern United States. In terms of floristic province s, it is represented by the North American Atlantic Region and part of the Canadian Province of the Circumboreal Region. [ Western North America ] The Western North America bioregion includes the Temperate coniferous forests of the coastal and mountain regions of southern Alaska, western Canada, and the western United States from the Pacific Coast and Northern California to the Rocky Mountains, as well as the cold-winter intermountain deserts and xeric shrublands and temperate grasslands and shrublands of the western United States. In terms of floristic province s, it is represented by the Rocky Mountain Region. [ Northern Mexico and Southwestern North America ] The Northern Mexico bioregion includes the mild-winter to cold-winter deserts and xeric shrublands of northern Mexico, Southern California, and the Southwestern United States, including the Chihuahuan, Sonoran, and Mojave deserts. The Mediterranean climate ecoregion s of the Southern and Central Coast of California include the California chaparral and woodlands, California coastal sage and chaparral, California interior chaparral and woodlands, and California montane chaparral and woodlands. The bioregion also includes the warm temperate and subtropical pine and pine-oak forests, including the Arizona Mountains forests and the Sierra Madre Occidental, Sierra Madre Oriental, and Sierra Juarez and San Pedro Martir pine-oak forests. In terms of floristic province s, it is represented by the Madrean Region. [ History ] Although North America and South America are presently joined by the Isthmus of Panama, these continents were separated for about 180 million years, and evolved very different plant and animal lineages. When the ancient supercontinent of Pangaea split into two about 180 million years ago, North America remained joined to Eurasia as part of the supercontinent of Laurasia, while South America was part of the supercontinent of Gondwana. North America later split from Eurasia. North America has been joined by land bridges to both Asia and South America since then, which allowed an exchange of plant and animal species between the continents, the Great American Interchange. A former land bridge across the Bering Strait between Asia and North America allowed many plants and animals to move between these continents, and the Nearctic ecozone shares many plants and animals with the Palearctic. The two ecozones are sometimes included in a single Holarctic ecozone. Many large animals, or megafauna, including horse s, camel s, mammoth s, mastodont s, ground sloth s, sabre-tooth cats ( Smilodon ), the giant short-faced bear ( Arctodus simus ), and the cheetah, became extinct in North America at the end of the Pleistocene epoch (ice ages), at the same time the first evidence of humans appeared, in what is called the Holocene extinction event. Previously, it was believed that the megafaunal extinctions were caused by the changing climate, but many scientists now believe that while the climate change contributed to these extinctions, the primary cause was hunting by newly-arrived humans or, in the case of some large predators, extinction resulting from prey becoming scarce. The American bison (Bison bison), brown bear or grizzly bear (Ursus arctos), and elk or wapiti (Cervus canadensis) entered North America around the same time as the first humans, and expanded rapidly, filling ecological niches left empty by the newly-extinct North American megafauna. [ Flora and fauna ] [ Flora and fauna that originated in the Nearctic ] Animals originally unique to the Nearctic include: Family Canidae, dog s, wolves, foxes, and coyote s Family Camelidae, camel s and their South American relatives including the llama. The last North American Camelids went extinct during the last ice age. Family Equidae, horse s and their relatives. Family Antilocapridae, which includes the pronghorn Tremarctinae, or short-faced, bears, including the extinct giant short-faced bear (Arctodus simius). The last remaining member of the group is the spectacled bear (Tremarctos ornatus) of South America. The now-extinct American cheetah (Miracinonyx) [ Flora and fauna endemic to the Nearctic ] One bird family, the wrentit s (Timaliinae), is endemic to the Nearctic region. The Holarctic has four endemic families: divers (Gaviidae), grouse (Tetraoninae), auk s (Alcidae), and the waxwing s (Bombycillidae). The scarab beetle families Pleocomidae and Diphyllostomatidae ( Coleoptera ) are also endemic to the Nearctic. The fly species Cynomya cadaverina is also found in high numbers in this area. Plants families endemic or nearly endemic to the Nearctic include Crossosomataceae, Simmondsiaceae, and Limnanthaceae. [ Nearctic Terrestrial Ecoregions ] [ External links ] [ Nearctic ] Map of the ecozones Nearctica, The Natural World of North America [ References ] Flannery, Tim (2001). The Eternal Frontier: an Ecological History of North America and its Peoples. Grove Press, New York. Ricketts, Taylor H., Eric Dinerstein, David M. Olson, Colby J. Loucks, et al. (1999). Terrestrial Ecoregions of North America: a Conservation Assessment. Island Press, Washington DC. Category:Terrestrial ecozone Category:Natural history of North America Category:Biogeography Category:Phytogeography ca:Zona neàrtica cs:Nearktická oblast da:Nearktiske zone de:Nearktis et:Nearktis es:Neártico eo:Nearkta ekozono fa:بومگاه نوشمالگانی fr:Néarctique ko:신북구 it:Ecozona neartica ka:ნეარქტიკის ოლქი nl:Nearctisch gebied ja:新北区 no:Nearktis nn:Den nearktiske regionen pl:Kraina nearktyczna pt:Região neoártica ru:Неарктика simple:Nearctic sv:Nearktiska regionen zh:新北界