[ May 2012 May 2012 ] Accounts payable, also known as Creditors, is money owed by a business to its suppliers and shown on its Balance Sheet as a liability. An accounts payable is recorded in the Account Payable sub-ledger at the time an invoice is vouchered for payment. Vouchered, or vouched, means that an invoice is approved for payment and has been recorded in the General Ledger or AP subledger as an outstanding,or open, liability because it has not been paid. Payables are often categorized as Trade Payables, payables for the purchase of physical goods that are recorded in Inventory, and Expense Payables, payables for the purchase of goods or services that are expensed. Common examples of Expense Payables are advertising, travel, entertainment, office supplies and utilities. A/P is a form of credit that suppliers offer to their customers by allowing them to pay for a product or service after it has already been received. Suppliers offer various payment terms for an invoice. Payment terms may include the offer of a cash discount for paying an invoice within a defined number of days. For example, 2%,30 Net 31 terms mean that the payor will deduct 2% from the invoice if payment is madewithin 30 days. If the payment is made on Day 31 then the full amount is paid. In household s, accounts payable are ordinarily bills from the electric company, telephone company, cable television or satellite dish service, newspaper subscription, and other such regular services. Householders usually track and pay on a monthly basis by hand using cheques, credit cards or internet banking. In a business, there is usually a much broader range of services in the A/P file, and accountants or bookkeeper s usually use accounting software to track the flow of money into this liability account when they receive invoices and out of it when they make payments. Increasingly, large firms are using specialized Accounts Payable automation solutions (commonly called ePayables) to automate the paper and manual elements of processing an organization&apos;s invoices. Commonly, a supplier will ship a product, issue an invoice, and collect payment later, which describes a cash conversion cycle, a period of time during which the supplier has already paid for raw materials but hasn&apos;t been paid in return by the final customer. When the invoice is received by the purchaser it is matched to the packing slip and purchase order, and if all is in order, the invoice is paid. This is referred to as the three-way match. [ Schaeffer Mary S. Mary S. Schaeffer Controller and CFOs Guide to Accounts Payable John Wiley &amp; Sons 2007 0-471-78589-X ] The three-way match can slow down the payment process, so the method may be modified. For example, three-way matching may be limited solely to large-value invoices, or the matching is automatically approved if the received quantity is within a certain percentage of the amount authorized in the purchase order. { http://www.accountingtools.com/article-ap-invoice-approval-pr } [ Expense administration ] Expense administration is usually closely related to accounts payable, and sometimes those functions are performed by the same employee. The expense administrator verifies employees&apos; expense report s, confirming that receipts exist to support airline, ground transport, meals and entertainment, telephone, hotel, and other expenses. This documentation is necessary for tax purposes and to prevent reimbursement of inappropriate or erroneous expenses. Airline expenses are, perhaps, the most prone to fraud because of the high cost of air travel and the confusing nature of airline-related documentation, which can consist of an array of reservations, receipts, and actual tickets. [ Internal controls ] A variety of checks against abuse are usually present to prevent embezzlement by accounts payable personnel. Segregation of duties is a common control. Nearly all companies have a junior employee process and print a cheque and a senior employee review and sign the cheque. Often, the accounting software will limit each employee to performing only the functions assigned to them, so that there is no way any one employee – even the controller – can singlehandedly make a payment. Some companies also separate the functions of adding new vendors and entering vouchers. This makes it impossible for an employee to add himself as a vendor and then cut a cheque to himself without colluding with another employee. This file is referred to as the master vendor file. It is the repository of all significant information about the company&apos;s suppliers. It is the reference point for accounts payable when it comes to paying invoices. [ Schaeffer Mary S. Mary S. Schaeffer Accounts Payable &amp; Sarbanes Oxley: Strengthening Your Internal Controls John Wiley &amp; Sons 2006 0-471-78588-1 ] In addition, most companies require a second signature on cheques whose amount exceeds a specified threshold. Accounts payable personnel must watch for fraudulent invoices. In the absence of a purchase order system, the first line of defense is the approving manager. However, A/P staff should become familiar with a few common problems, such as &quot; Yellow Pages &quot; ripoff s in which fraudulent operators offer to place an advertisement. The walking-fingers logo has never been trademarked, and there are many different Yellow Pages-style directories, most of which have a small distribution. According to an article in the Winter 2000 American Payroll Association &apos;s Employer Practices, &quot; Vendors may send documents that look like invoices but in small print they state &quot; this is not a bill. &quot; These may be charges for directory listings or advertisements. Recently, some companies have begun sending what appears to be a rebate or refund check; in reality, it is a registration for services that is activated when the document is returned with a signature. &quot; In accounts payable, a simple mistake can cause a large overpayment. A common example involves duplicate invoices. An invoice may be temporarily misplaced or still in the approval status when the vendors calls to inquire into its payment status. After the A/P staff member looks it up and finds it has not been paid, the vendor sends a duplicate invoice; meanwhile the original invoice shows up and gets paid. Then the duplicate invoice arrives and inadvertently gets paid as well, perhaps under a slightly different invoice number. [ Audits of accounts payable ] Auditors often focus on the existence of approved invoices, expense reports, and other supporting documentation to support cheques that were cut. The presence of a confirmation or statement from the supplier is reasonable proof of the existence of the account. It is not uncommon for some of this documentation to be lost or misfiled by the time the audit rolls around. An auditor may decide to expand the sample size in such situations. Auditors typically prepare an ageing structure of accounts payable for a better understanding of outstanding debts over certain periods (30, 60, 90 days, etc.). Such structures are helpful in the correct presentation of the balance sheet as of year end. [ Elmore Christopher The 8 Pitfalls of Accounts Payable Automation 2011 CreateSpace NC 10:1461039967 198 http://www.costperinvoice.com ] [ Accounts Payable Automation ] ePayables are defined as the technology or process automation solutions that automate any part of the accounts payable ( &quot; AP &quot; ) process.The key to Accounts Payable Automation is to develop or invest in technology that will enable the company to free up labor from task the technology can perform. Examples are opening mail, scanning, entry in to the Accounting System or ERP System and filing(4). There are three main components in AP Automation. 100% Electronic Invoices Event Driven Workflow Reporting Layer to Track all Actions By automating the process, companies can greatly reduce the time it takes to process an invoice. In most cases it can be taken down from several weeks or months to a matter of days. Once an invoice is available electronically, it can automatically be matched against the order and routed for payment and sent to the AP department for processing. Technology also automates the processing of periodic or contract-based purchase invoices. When technology like this is fully implemented, most invoices no longer require human intervention. [ Clark Robert Accounts Payable – Opportunities for Improvement http://robertclarkmtfs.com/accounts-payable-opportunities-improvement/ ] [ See also ] Accounts receivable Payroll American Accounts Payable Association List of finance topics Invoice reader Creditor Reference [ References ] [ October 2007 ] Category:Accounting terminology de:Verbindlichkeiten es:Cuenta por pagar hi:देनदारी लेखे hu:Kötelezettség ja:買掛金 ru:Кредиторская задолженность uk:Кредиторська заборгованість zh:應付帳款