[ Kilkis Περιφερειακή ενότητα Κιλκίς el Regional unit 2010 Dimi Kilkis numbered.svg Municipalities of Kilkis 150px Nomos Kilkis.png Kilkis within Greece 41 0 N 22 50 E inline,title Country Greece Region Central Macedonia 2011 Capital Kilkis Vice Governor Christos Gountenoudis Metric 2519 91828 2005 auto EET +2 EEST +3 Postal codes 61x xx Area codes 234x0 Car plates ΚΙ GR-57 ] Kilkis ( [ Περιφερειακή ενότητα Κιλκίς ] ) is one of the regional units of Greece. It is part of the region of Central Macedonia. Its capital is the city of Kilkis. [ Geography ] The geography of the regional unit of Kilkis is characterized by the wide and flat Axios river valley in the westcentral part, and mountain ranges on its western and northeastern edges. The mountain range in the west, on the border with Pella regional unit, is Mount Paiko (highest peak [ 1650 m ft 0 on / ] ). In the north, the Kerkini range straddles the border with the Republic of Macedonia. At [ 1874 m ft 0 on / ] the highest peak in Kilkis regional unit is located here. The border with Serres regional unit to the northeast is formed by the lower Kroussia range (highest peak [ 1179 m ft 0 on / ] ). Lake Doirani is situated in the north, shared with the Republic of Macedonia. Kilkis borders the Thessaloniki regional unit to the south. The climate of the Kilkis regional unit is humid continental in the north, and humid subtropical in the lower regions. [ History ] The area of the modern regional unit was part of the Kingdom of Macedonia from the 8th century BC until the Third Macedonian War (171 BC - 168 BC), when it became a part of the Roman Empire. At the division of the Roman Empire in 395 AD, the area joined the eastern part, later known as the Byzantine Empire. Between the 7th century and the 11th century, it changed hands between the Byzantine Empire and the Bulgarian Empire repeatedly. In the 13th and 14th century Western Europeans and Serbs briefly ruled the area. The Ottoman Empire conquered the area in 1371, and ruled it until the First Balkan War of 1912. In the Second Balkan War of 1913, the Greek army captured the area, which became part of Greece. It absorbed many of the Greeks from Northern Macedonia (now the Rep. of Macedonia), especially from Gevgeli, Vogdantsa, Polyane and Stromnitsa. { [in Greek: &quot; Trapped...the Greeks of Skopje &quot;, Dimitrios Alexandrou, Erodios, Thessaloniki 2008] } In the aftermath of the Balkan Wars, World War I and the Greco-Turkish War (1919-1922) most of its Turkish and Bulgarian population emigrated, and many Greeks from Bulgaria and Turkey settled in the area, as prescribed by the Treaty of Lausanne. Until 1939, when created into a separate prefecture, the area was part of the Thessaloniki Prefecture. [ Administrative subdivisions of countries: a comprehensive world reference, 1900 through 1998 Gwillim Law McFarland 1999 978-0-7864-0729-3 152 ] At the 2011 Kallikratis reform, the Kilkis Prefecture became a regional unit. [ Transport ] The Motorway 1 ( E75, Skopje - Polykastro - Thessaloniki - Athens) runs through the regional unit from north to south. Two railways pass through the regional unit: from Thessaloniki to Skopje via Polykastro and Eidomeni, and from Thessaloniki to Sofia, Istanbul and Alexandroupoli via Kilkis and Mouries. [ Administration ] The regional unit Kilkis is subdivided into 2 municipalities. These are (number as in the map in the infobox): [ Kallikratis reform law text ] Paionia (2) Kilkis (1) [ Prefecture ] As a part of the 2011 Kallikratis government reform, the former Kilkis Prefecture ( [ Νομός Κιλκίς ] ) was transformed into a regional unit within the Central Macedonia region, without any change in boundaries. At the same time, the municipalities were reorganised, according to the table below. New municipality Old municipalities Seat Kilkis Kilkis Kilkis Gallikos Doirani Kroussa Mouries Pikrolimni Cherso Paionia Axioupoli Polykastro Goumenissa Evropos Livadia Polykastro [ Provinces ] Province of Kilkis Province of Peοnia - Goumenissa Note: Provinces no longer hold any legal status in Greece. [ See also ] List of settlements in the Kilkis regional unit [ References ] [ External links ] Municipality of Kilkis Prefecture of Kilkis History of the Greek Army at the Battle of Kilkis Category:Prefectures of Greece Category:Regional units of Greece ar:كيلكيس (مقاطعة) bg:Кукуш (областна единица) ca:Unitat perifèrica de Kilkis de:Kilkis (Präfektur) el:Νομός Κιλκίς es:Unidad periférica de Kilkís eo:Kilkiso fr:Nome de Kilkís ko:킬키스 현 hr:Prefektura Kilkis it:Kilkis (unità periferica) ka:კილკისი (ნომი) la:Cilcis (nomus Graeciae) lt:Kilkio nomas nl:Kilkis (departement) ja:キルキス県 no:Kilkis (prefektur) nn:Periferieininga Kilkís pl:Jednostka regionalna Kilkis pt:Kilkis (unidade regional) ro:Prefectura Kilkis ru:Килкис (ном) sr:Кукуш (округ) sh:Prefektura Kilkis sv:Kilkis (perifereiakí enótita) tr:Kilkis (il) uk:Кілкіс (ном) war:Kilkis (prefektura) zh:基爾基斯州