[ 1940 ] { South } { SM Mall of Asia Rotunda in } { Pasay } { Manila } { President Diosdado Macapagal Boulevard in } { Bay City (Metro Manila), } { Pasay City } { President Manuel Roxas Boulevard in Baclaran, } { Pasay City } { Howard Taft Avenue in Baclaran, } { Pasay City } { South Luzon Expressway in Magallanes, } { Makati City Antonio S. Arnaiz Avenue in Dasmarinas Village, } { Makati City } { Zobel Cia Ayala Avenue and } { Nichols-McKinley Road in } { Ayala Center, } { Makati City Senator Gil Puyat Avenue/Nicolas Buendia Avenue } { Ayala Center, } { Makati City 32nd Street and Kalayaan Avenue in } { Rockwell Center, } { Makati City J.P. Rizal and } { Pasig River Expressway in Guadalupe, } { Makati City Boni Avenue and Pioneer Avenue in Pioneer, } { Mandaluyong City } { William Shaw Boulevard in Crossing, } { Mandaluyong Donya Julia Vargas Avenue in } { Ortigas Center, } { Mandaluyong City } { Don Paco Ortigas Avenue in } { Ortigas Center, } { Mandaluyong City Santolan Road and } { Colonel Bonny Serrano Avenue in Santolan, } { Quezon City General Pedro Tuazon Boulevard in } { Araneta Center, } { Quezon City } { Donya Aurora Quezon Boulevard in Cubao, } { Quezon City Kamias and Kamuning Avenue in Cubao, Quezon City East Avenue and Timog Avenue, } { Triangle Park, } { Quezon City } { Manuel Luis Quezon Avenue in } { Triangle Park, } { Quezon City } { Mindanao Avenue in } { Triangle Park, } { Quezon City North Avenue and West Avenue in } { Triangle Park, } { Quezon City Roosevelt Avenue and Congressional Avenue in Munoz, } { Quezon City } { North Luzon Expressway, } { Elpidio Quirino Highway and Andres Bonifacio Avenue in Balintawak, Quezon City } { North } { Monumento Roundabout in } { Caloocan City } { Caloocan, } { Quezon City, } { San Juan, } { Mandaluyong, } { Makati, } { Pasay } Epifanio de los Santos Avenue, commonly abbreviated as EDSA, formerly known as Highway 54, F. Rein and P. Lovina, is the longest and most important avenue in Metro Manila in the Philippines. EDSA stretches some [ 23.8 km ] as it connects and provides access to the cities of Caloocan, Quezon City, Mandaluyong, San Juan, Makati, Pasig, Taguig, Paranaque and Pasay. The [ 22.9 km ] portion of EDSA is designated as a part of the Circumferential Road 4. The Avenue is also the most important commuting artery between the most important industrial centers in the Philippines, the Triangle Park in Quezon Avenue, the Araneta Center in Aurora Boulevard and P. Tuazon Boulevard, the Eastwood City in Colonel Bonny Serrano Avenue, the Greenhills Shopping Center in Connecticut Street, the Ortigas Center in Ortigas Avenue, the Pioneer Center in the Pioneer Street, the Rockwell Center in Kalayaan Avenue, the Ayala Center and Bonifacio Global City in Ayala Avenue and the Pasay Reclamation Area. Being the most important highway in the Metropolis, EDSA handles 316,345 cars per section on average every day, { Philippine Daily Inquirer July 7, 2009 } and An average of 2.34 million vehicles go through EDSA every day. [ Jao-Grey Margarte Too Many Buses, Too Many Agencies Clog Edsa Philippine Center for Investigative Journalism 2007-12-27 http://pcij.org/stories/2007/buses.html 2007-12-28 ] EDSA is a partially controlled access Road. EDSA consists mostly 10-lanes, 5 for both direction, although it sometimes widens to 12-14 lanes and sometimes narrows to 2-8 lanes. The central lanes (represented by white markers) are reserved for private vehicles, and one is for Motorcycle s (represented with blue markers), and the two outer lanes (represented by Yellow markers) are reserved for buses, jeepneys and HOV traffic. Road signs and Directions are placed on the MRT Stations and in the Centre island. [ History ] The People Power Revolution. The picture above shows the Santolan-Bonny Serrano intersection being flocked by thousands of protesters Thousands of protesters flocking on the Ortigas Interchange during the People Power 2 Construction of what was then called the &quot; North-South Circumferential Road &quot; started in the 1930s, during the term of President Manuel L. Quezon, with construction being led by Engineers Florencio Moreno and Osmundo Monsod. { |en.wikipilipinas.org-History of the Epifanio De los Santos Avenue } The road, starting at the North Diversion Road (today the North Luzon Expressway ) and ending at the current Magallanes Interchange with the South Luzon Expressway, was finished in 1940, shortly before World War II and the subsequent Japanese occupation of the Philippines. After the independence of the Philippines in 1946, the road was renamed Avenida 19 de Junio, after the birthdate of José Rizal. In the 1950s, the avenue was renamed Highway 54. However, there had been several disputes on what the deserved name of the avenue should be. Rizalists wanted the avenue&apos;s name to be kept as 19 de Junio, while President Ramon Magsaysay wanted the avenue be named after Rizal. Rizal residents, however, wanted the avenue to be named after a Rizaleño, historian, jurist and scholar Epifanio de los Santos. The Philippine Historical Committee (now the National Historical Commission of the Philippines ), the Philippine Historical Association, the Philippine Library Association Association of University and College Professors, the Philippine China Cultural Association, and the Philippine National Historical Society, led by fellow Rizaleños Eulogio Rodriguez and Juan Sumulong, supported the renaming of Highway 54 to Epifanio de los Santos Avenue. On April 7, 1959, de los Santos&apos; birthday, Republic Ave No. 2140 was passed, renaming the avenue to honor him. { Chan Robles Virtual Law Library - REPUBLIC ACT NO. 2140 - AN ACT CHANGING THE NAME OF HIGHWAY 54 IN THE PROVINCE OF RIZAL TO EPIFANIO DE LOS SANTOS AVENUE IN HONOR OF DON EPIFANIO DE LOS SANTOS, A FILIPINO SCHOLAR, JURIST AND HISTORIAN } Rapid urbanization in the 1960s and 1970s, particularly during the annexation of several Rizal towns to the newly-formed region of Metro Manila, marked the growth of industrial centers along the road, and several other roads were constructed to connect to the avenue, such as Ayala Avenue in Makati City. During the tenure of President Ferdinand Marcos, traffic jams in the avenue started to build up. Several interchanges were constructed to relieve congestion, including the Balintawak and Magallanes Interchange s at the ends of the avenue. Later, with the creation of the Metro Manila Arterial Road System, the Circumferential Road 4 system was creating, extending EDSA to Taft Avenue from the South Luzon Expressway (called F. Rein Avenue), and further to Roxas Boulevard (called P. Lovina Avenue). EDSA was also extended from its original Balintawak terminus to Apolonio Samson Road at the site of the Bonifacio Monument in Caloocan City, completing the Circumferential Road 4 system. In 1986, Epifanio de los Santos Avenue gained worldwide attention as the site of the peaceful revolution that toppled President Marcos, the People Power Revolution. After People Power, the avenue had been commonly known as EDSA, and the southern extensions were merged into the avenue. In 1995, the Manila Metro Rail Transit System began construction, being built over EDSA from North Avenue to Taft Avenue during the presidency of Joseph Estrada. The Avenue again became the site of the EDSA Revolution of 2001 that toppled President Estrada, and Vice-President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, who was declared President on January 20, 2001, was inaugurated at the EDSA Shrine. In 2006, the avenue was further extended from Roxas Boulevard to the SM Mall of Asia, where it now ends at the Mall of Asia Globe. EDSA later on became the site of the funeral procession of President Corazon Aquino, who died in 2009. In 2010, the Yellow Line of the Manila Light Rail Transit System was extended from Monumento to Roosevelt, ultimately transversing EDSA to end at the site of the current North Avenue MRT Station. In 2011, Bohol Representative Rene Lopez Relampagos filed House Bill (HB) No. 5422, proposing to rename Epifanio de los Santos Avenue as &quot; Corazon Aquino Avenue &quot;. The proposal is currently pending in the House of Representatives before the House Committee on Public Works and Highways. According to Relampagos, the idea to rename EDSA after Aquino was conceptualized in the aftermath of her death. [ Route ] { Metro Manila The cities it passes through are indicated in orange } EDSA forms the majority of the Circumferential Road 4 System, forming a semicircle around the City of Manila. The Avenue have many interchanges along its path, however, most interchanges along EDSA were incomplete, and that is why traffic lights are placed underneath flyovers and over underpasses, letting swerving and weaving cause traffic unto the avenue. EDSA starts from the Bonifacio Monument (Monumento) in Grace Park, Caloocan City, wherein it will continue straight eastwards, entering Quezon City through the Balintawak District, after intersecting with te North Luzon Expressway at the Balintawak Interchange. It will cross the Northern parts of Quezon City, passing through the Project 6 and Munoz Districts. It will sharply curve southwards after crossing the North Avenue-West Avenue Intersection in the Triangle Park Business Park. It will continue its route southwards, but slightly turns westwards slowly. It will then enter Mandaluyong City, crossing through the borders of the Ortigas Center. It will then curve smoothly westwards after it crosses the Pioneer Street, and will cross the Pasig River through the Guadalupe Bridge. It will enter the Makati City after crossing the Pasig River, passing through the districts of Guadalupe, Comembo and Magallanes in Makati. Being the most important artery of the metropolis, EDSA handles a significant volume of the traffic that flows through the cities of Metro Manila. An average of 2.34 million vehicles go through EDSA every day. The lead agency that manages the flow of traffic along EDSA is the Metropolitan Manila Development Authority (MMDA), an agency that is under the Office of the President and is advised by the Metro Manila Mayors League. One of the MMDA&apos;s traffic management schemes that is in effect on EDSA, among other major thoroughfares, is the Uniform Vehicular Volume Reduction Program. Many people observe that the cause of traffic jams on EDSA are erring bus and jeepney drivers especially as a multitude of the public utility vehicles they drive are unlicensed or &quot; colorum &quot;. Subsequently, buses have been the target of other traffic management programs, like the MMDA&apos;s Organized Bus Route Program. { MMDA Resolution No. 03-28 } { MMDA Resolution No. 04-01 } [ Notable Landmarks ] Epifanio De los Santos y. Cristobal, the Philippine historian to whom EDSA was named North EDSA Underneath The EDSA-SLEX Interchange [ Industrial Centers ] Araneta Center is a small industrial center in Cubao. Eastwood City is an industrial center in Libis, which can be access from EDSA by the Col. Bonny Serrano Avenue. Triangle Park is the group of malls near Quezon Avenue. Greenhills Shopping Center is an important shopping center in San Juan. Rockwell Center is a major business park in Makati. Ortigas Center is an important business park in Mandaluyong. Ayala Center is the most important business park in Makati. Fort Bonifacio or Bonifacio Global City is a main business park in Taguig. Bay City (Metro Manila) is the reclamated area in Pasay. [ Malls ] SM City North EDSA TriNoma Eton Centris/Centris Walk SM Cubao Robinsons Galleria SM Megamall Starmall Forum Robinsons (Robinson&apos;s Pioneer) Greenbelt Glorietta SM Mall of Asia [ Other Landmarks ] People Power Monument EDSA Shrine [ Exits and major intersections ] EDSA usually consists of 12-lanes, 6 for each direction, wherein each lane has a fix destination. Swerving and Weaving have been prohibited in EDSA, but buses usually swerve,causing many traffic jams and accidents along the avenue. This is the list of the Major intersections, flyovers, underpasses and exits along EDSA. There are no exit number or toll gates along EDSA, as it is not an expressway. Lane 6 Reserved for U-Turning Vehicles. Lane 5 Is reserved for Private Vehicles going to Alabang/Pasay/ SLEX /Baclaran for southbound and SLEX /Munoz/Balintawak/Monumento for Northbound Lane 4 Is reserved for Private Vehicles going to Quezon Avenue /Cubao/ Shaw Boulevard /Baclaran for southbound and Cubao/ Ayala Avenue /Airport/East Avenue for Northbound Lane 3 Is reserved for Motorcycles Lane 2 Is for Provincial Buses going to Cavite/Laguna/Rizal via NLEX / SLEX / MacArthur Highway Lane 1 Is for Non-Provincial Buses going to Letre Road for Northbound and NAIA / Roxas Boulevard / Mall of Asia for Southbound [ Intersections ] [ SM Mall of Asia wide pan.jpg 1200px The Globe Rotunda, the southern end of EDSA. ] { SM City North EDSA and Trinoma can be seen from a distance. } This is a list of the intersections of EDSA, where in the roads indicated by bold are major intersections and are further discussed in the table below. The Globe Rotunda, the southern end of EDSA Northern EDSA, before the construction of the LRT-1 extension Location Intersection Caloocan City Rizal Avenue SB/ Douglas MacArthur Highway NB Benin Street NB/General R. Simon Street SB Asuncion Street NB 8th Street SB/General Tinio NB General Conception Street NB Mariano Ponce Street NB Deodato Arellano Street NB U. Plata Street SB Tandang Sora Street NB Biglang Awa Street SB General Tomas Mascarado Street NB General Evangelista Street NB Don V. Ang Street NB General Daniel Tirona Street NB Gregoria De Jesus NB/F. Aguilar SB P. Aguilar NB Katipunan Street NB/V. Mariano SB Quezon City North Luzon Expressway NB/A. Bonifacio SB Elpidio Quirino Highway NB Oliveros Road NB Kaingin Street NB/Gregorio Araneta Extension SB Private Road NB Fema Road NB Seminary Road NB Congressional Avenue NB/Roosevelt Avenue SB Corregidor Street NB/Bansalangin Street SB Bansalangin Street SB Misamis Street NB Bulacan Street SB North Avenue NB/West Avenue SB North Lawin Street SB East Lawin Street SB/ Mindanao Avenue NB T. Benitez Street SB Times Road SB Manuel Luis Quezon Avenue Intersection Panay Avenue SB Mother Ignacia Avenue SB Scout Albano Street SB Scout Borromeo Street SB/NIA Road NB GMA Network Drive SB Timog Avenue SB/East Avenue NB Mapagmahal street NB Kamias Street NB/Kamuning Road SB K-3 Street SB/K-10 Street NB E. Garcia Avenue NB New York Avenue Intersection Monte De Piedad SB Donya Aurora Quezon Boulevard Intersection General Roxas NB Arayat NB/Central Avenue SB Banahaw Street NB/General MacArthur Street SB General Pedro Tuazon Boulevard Intersection North Road SB/5th Avenue NB South Road SB/Main Avenue NB Liberty Avenue Intersection Santolan Road SB/ Col. Bonny Serrano Avenue NB San Juan City Annapolis Avenue SB Connecticut Street SB Quezon City Katipunan Avenue (Whiteplains Avenue) NB Rochester Street SB Don V. Madrigal Avenue NB Mandaluyong City Don Francisco Paco Ortigas Avenue Fordham NB/P. Poveda SB Guadix Drive NB Wack-Wack Road NB Princeton Street NB Stanford Street SB/Donya Julia Vargas Avenue NB Cornell Street NB William J. Shaw Boulevard Intersection Sultan Street SB/United Street NB Dr. J. Fabella Street SB Reliance Street NB Madisson Street NB Mayon Street SB Boni Avenue SB/Pioneer Street NB Guadalupe Bridge Makati City J.P. Rizal Street SB/ Pasig River Expressway NB Padre Burgos street NB/Bernardino Street SB Estrella Street SB Taurus Street NB/Harvard Street SB Pasig Line SB/Kalayaan Avenue NB 32nd Street NB Guingua Street NB Nicolas Buendia Avenue NB/Nicolas Buendia Avenue (Senator Gil Puyat Avenue SB) Recoletos Circle SB Zobel Cia Ayala Avenue SB/Nichols-McKinley Road NB East Drive SB South Drive NB Antonio S. Arnaiz Avenue SB/Antonio Arnaiz S. Avenue NB Lippay Street SB Amorsolo Street Intersection Pasong Tamo Avenue/Chino Roces Avenue Intersection South Luzon Expressway Rodriguez Street NB/Lapulapu Street SB Captain P. Apolinario NB/Magallanes Avenue SB Evangelista Street SB Captain Reyes SB/C. Jose Street NB Pasay City E. Rodriguez Street Intersection M. Dela Cruz Intersection San Roque Riverside NB Apelo Cruz NB/Cabrera Street SB Tramo Road NB/Aurora Boulevard SB Don Revilla NB/Zamora Street SB President Howard Taft Avenue Intersection Pilapil Street SB Park Avenue Intersection F.B. Harrison Street NB/Quirino Avenue SB Roxas Boulevard Parkway Intersection President Manuel Roxas Boulevard Intersection Diosdado Macapagal Boulevard Intersection J.W. Diokno Boulevard Rotunda [ Major Junctions ] This is the list of major junctions, major exits, flyovers, underpasses and interchanges along EDSA. [ North Luzon Expressway ] Intersection Image Kilometre post Exit/Intersection Exit Location Route description and remarks 35 Bonifacio Monument Roundabout(EDSA-Monumento) Grace Park, Caloocan City The Bonifacio Monument, where the Samson Road (Western) (C-4), EDSA (Eastern) MacArthur Highway (Northern) and Rizal Avenue (Southern) (R-9) meet in a counter clockwise roundabout around the tall monument of Andres Bonifacio which is the marker of the 1896 Philippine Revolution together with the Katipunan headed by Andres Bonifacio. It is the North terminus of EDSA. The Apolonio Samson Road goes to Malabon City and Navotas City. The Rizal Avenue goes to Manila and to the Manila City Hall and the MacArthur Highway goes to the Provinces in the North and Central Luzon and meets with the Pan-Philippine Highway when it reach Santa Rita, Bulacan. The Monumento LRT Station terminal of LRT 1 is located at the corner of the avenue and Rizal Avenue Extension. 33 North Luzon Expressway NB/ A. Bonifacio SB (EDSA-Cloverleaf) Balintawak, Quezon City This is a Cloverleaf interchange with the Radial Road 8. Staying on the central lanes leads to a flyover that lets you stay on EDSA. Staying on the SB first bus lane leads to A. Bonifacio Avenue SB and staying on the SB second bus lane leads to NB A. Bonifacio and NLEX. Staying on the NB first bus lane leads to NB NLEX and staying on the second bus lane leads to SB NLEX and A. Bonifacio Avenue. A. Bonifacio goes to Quiapo and Divisoria in Manila. Balintawak station of LRT 1 is located nearby. &apos;&apos;&apos; Quirino Highway Service Road NB (EDSA-Cloverleaf) Is the only access to Quirino Highway from EDSA. Vehicles from EDSA that went to NLEX can access this road by taking the service road. They can also access the highway by the Mindanao Avenue Exit in NLEX. There is no access from Quirino Highway to EDSA. EDSA can be accessed from Quirino Highway by taking the southern Mindanao Avenue. 200px 31 Congressional Avenue NB/Roosevelt Avenue SB Intersection (EDSA-Muñoz) Munoz, Quezon City The Congressional Avenue is going to Tandang Sora and C-5 and the Roosevelt Avenue is going to Quezon Avenue. SB can access Congressional Avenue by a U-Turn Slot and Roosevelt Avenue can be accessed from NB by also a U-turn slot. The access between Congressional Avenue and Roosevelt Avenue also relies on the U-turn slots along EDSA. Roosevelt Avenue station of LRT 1 is located near the intersection. 200px 29 North Avenue NB and West Avenue SB Intersection (EDSA-SM North) Triangle Park, Quezon City The Eastside is going to Veterans Memorial Medical Center, SM City North EDSA and the Elliptical Road, and the Southside is going to Quezon Avenue. North Avenue station of MRT 3 and the proposed North Avenue /Grand Central Terminal is located nearby. 28 Mindanao Avenue Junction NB (EDSA-Trinoma) U-Turn Slots provides access to this road and the access from this road to EDSA. The Avenue goes to the Trinoma Malls, C-5 Road, Quirino Highway and NLEX 200px 27 Quezon Avenue Intersection Flyover (EDSA- Espana ) Quezon Avenue have a 4 lane underpass under EDSA and EDSA have a 6-lane flyover over Quezon Avenue. The normal grade level have two wide U-turn slots, letting the vehicles underneath to access the desired direction. The Northeastside is going to Fairview and the Southwestside is going to Manila. Quezon Avenue MRT Station station of MRT 3 is located nearby. 26 Panay Avenue Junction SB (EDSA-MRT Highway Delta) Panay Avenue is an alternate route to Manila and Quezon Avenue 25 Kamuning Flyovers Is a 6 lane flyover that goes over East Avenue and Kamuning Road. East Avenue and Timog Avenue travellers can access the SB flyover by a ramp, but there is no access to Kamuning and Kamias road from the Flyover. This flyover is seen on TV Stations ABS-CBN and GMA Network for live traffic updates because ABS-CBN Broadcast Center and GMA Network Center located near the flyover. 25 East Avenue NB/Timog Avenue SB Intersection Turning Right and U-turning can access the desired directions on both the roads. There is no access to East Avenue from the NB Kamuning Flyover. East Avenue goes to the Quezon Memorial Circle and Timog Avenue goes to Quezon Avenue. 24 Kamuning SB/Kamias NB Intersection Cubao, Quezon City The Northeastside is going to Circumferential Road 5 and the Southwestside is going to the South Triangle Area. The Kamuning MRT Station is located near this intersection. 20 Aurora Boulevard Intersection Underpass(EDSA-Cubao) This is an underpass located 200 Meters from the Kamuning Road. Keeping left stays on EDSA and keeping right takes you to Aurora Boulevard, wherein westside is going to Araneta Center, C-5 Road, Marikina City and Rizal Province and the eastside is going to San Juan City and Sta. Mesa, Manila. The Araneta Center-Cubao MRT Station is located over EDSA shortly after the underpass and the Araneta Center-Cubao LRT Station is located nearby. The Eulogio Rodriguez Sr. Boulevard (which merges from eastern Aurora Boulevard shortly after crossing EDSA) can only be accessed by going to Aurora Boulevard. 19 P.Tuazon Intersection Underpass(EDSA-Araneta Center) This underpass is located 200 Meters from Aurora Boulevard. The east side goes to Cubao, Araneta Center and C-5 and the west side goes to the N.Domingo Street. 18 Santolan Road SB/ Col. Bonny Serrano Avenue NB(EDSA-Santolan) This flyover is located 200 Meters from the Tuazon Underpass. Bonny Serrano Avenue is going to the Eastwood City, Marikina City before becoming a part of the Circumferential Road 5 and the Santolan Road is going to the New Manila District. The Santolan MRT Station, the Camp Rafael Crame and the Camp Aguinaldo is located near this intersection. 17 Connecticut Street junction SB(EDSA-Annapolis) Greenhills, San Juan This road goes to the Annapolis Business District. Only SB have access to it, but NB can access it by taking the Ortigas Avenue. 17 White Plains Avenue Junction Northbound - People Power Monument(EDSA-Corinthian) This exit can only be access by NB, and SB can access it by taking Col. Bonny Serrano Avenue. White Plains Avenue goes to C-5 15 Ortigas Avenue Intersection Flyovers (EDSA-Shrine) Ortigas Center, Mandaluyong City This is a 4-level partial Stack Interchange between Ortigas Avenue and EDSA. A separate ramp from SB EDSA turns left, leading to the Ortigas Center and Pasig City, another ramp from NB EDSA turns right to San Juan City and the Greenhills Shopping Center. The Westside is going to San Juan and Greenhills Shopping Center and the Eastside is going to Pasig City and Cainta, Rizal. The POEA, Ortigas MRT Station and the EDSA Shrine are located near this intersection. 13 Doña Julia Vargas Ave. Intersection(EDSA-Megamall) This exit on the northbound side provides access to Donya Julia Vargas Avenue, SM Megamall, Ortigas CBD and the Circumferential Road 5. There is no access from SB EDSA or from the Shaw Boulevard underpass (which merges with EDSA just a short distance to the north) to this intersection. SB can access this road by taking Shaw Boulevard. 200px 10 Shaw Boulevard Intersection Underpass(EDSA-Crossing) There is an underpass under Shaw Boulevard at the intersection for those willing to stay on EDSA. Otherwise, keeping right will take you to Shaw Boulevard. A 4-lane flyover over EDSA and MRT Shaw Boulevard are located over this intersection. WB Shaw Boulevard takes you to Manila. EB takes you to Ortigas CBD, Pasig City, Circumferential Road 5 and the province of Rizal. 200px 9 Boni Avenue SB/Pioneer Street NB(EDSA-Pioneer) Pioneer Center, Mandaluyong Only right turns are allowed at this intersection with Boni Avenue, although Boni Avenue does have a two-lane underpass under EDSA. WB Boni Avenue heads to Mandaluyong City Center and Manila. EB Boni Avenue (Becomes Pioneer Avenue shortly after leaving EDSA) is an alternative route to Ortigas CBD. Boni MRT Station and Robinson&apos;s Pioneer are located here. 8 Guadalupe Bridge Parclo(EDSA-Guadalupe) Guadalupe, Makati This parclo interchange with J.P. Rizal Street near the after the crossing the Pasig River at the Guadalupe Bridge provides access to the Guadalupe district. MRT Guadalupe is located here and crosses the Pasig River. 7 Richmond Flyovers(EDSA-Estrella) From EDSA, Estrella Street can be accessed using a flyover from the northbound lanes, and by an exit from the southbound lanes. There is no access to NB EDSA from Estrella Street. Estrella Street provides access to Richmond/Guadalupe and Mandaluyong City. 6 WB Kalayaan Flyover from 32nd Street At 32nd street near the border of Taguig and Makati City, 32nd Street splits into two. Keeping right takes you to Kalayaan Avenue and EDSA, while keeping left takes you to the Kalayaan Flyover main lanes, Gil Puyat Ave., and Makati City. 6 WB Kalayaan Flyover from Kalayaan Avenue The Kalayaan flyover from Kalayaan Avenue is a little different. Just before the 32nd Avenue intersection, there is an exit ramp that takes you to the Kalayaan Flyover main lanes, Buendia, and Makati City. Keeping straight on Kalayaan Avenue provides access to EDSA. Just before EDSA, Kalayaan Avenue splits into two. Keeping left takes you onto a separate flyover that provides access to SB EDSA towards Ninoy Aquino International Airport, SM Mall of Asia and Cavite province. Keeping right takes you to NB EDSA towards Richmond/Guadalupe, Ortigas CBD, Cubao, NLEX and Monumento. 6 Senator Gil Puyat Avenue Junction SB(EDSA-Buendia) Gil Puyat Avenue (Buendia) can be accessed by turning right from SB EDSA by keeping left, while access from NB EDSA can be obtained either by using a U-turn slot or via Ayala Avenue. There is no access to the Kalayaan flyover from EDSA. 6 EB Buendia-Kalayaan Flyover Buendia will have a 6-lane flyover leading to Kalayaan Avenue. Buendia-Kalayaan Flyover splits into two at the beginning of the Kalayaan Flyover. Keeping right takes you to SB EDSA towards Ninoy Aquino International Airport, SM Mall of Asia and Cavite province, while keeping left takes you to the Kalayaan flyover main lanes. Just a short way from the beginning, there is an exit which you can take to access NB EDSA towards Richmond/Guadalupe, Ortigas CBD, Cubao, NLEX and Monumento. About midway through the flyover, there is an exit that can take you to the main lanes of Kalayaan Avenue towards Pateros, while keeping straight takes you to 32nd Street and Taguig Global City. 5 Makati Underpass SB Ayala Center Keeping left takes you to Ayala Avenue and Pasay Road, whilw keeping right stays you on EDSA. The McKinley Road can be accessed by using Ayala Avenue. 5 Makati Underpass NB This is a 3-lane underpass from the SB underneath the Pasay Road and Ayala Avenue. However, unlike the SB, Ayala Avenue can be access from the underpass, wherein the underpass splits into two here. Keeping left will take you straight on EDSA and to Ayala Avenue, in which the central lane can access that road, while keeping right, Arnaiz/Pasay Road and the McKinley Road can be accessed. 200px 5 Ayala Avenue SB/McKinley Road NB(EDSA-Ayala) Keeping right in SB provide access to both these roads, while keeping at the rightmost lane from the Makati Underpass NB can access Ayala Avenue, while McKinley Road can be accessed by keeping left away from the Underpass. A Flyover from Ayala Avenue leads to NB EDSA. The Ayala MRT Station is located in the Underpass. Ayala Avenue goes to the Ayala Center and the McKinley Road goes to the Bonifacio Global City and the C-5 Road. 5 Antonio S. Arnaiz Avenue (Pasay Road) SB(EDSA-Livertad) This exit is a signalized junction with the Pasay Road, which can take into the Makati CBD and Roxas Boulevard. There is no access to this road from the Underpass. 200px 4 Magallanes Interchange (EDSA-Skyway) Magallanes, Makati City This is the tallest interchange in EDSA, located about 200 Meters from the Arnaiz Avenue from SB and 200 Meter from Evangelista Street NB. SB and NB EDSA will slowly split into 2. Staying Right leads to SLEX and SM Mall of Asia and keeping left leads to Pasong Tamo in SB, while staying right in NB leads to SLEX and staying left stays you on EDSA. Pasong Tamo Intersection(EDSA-Chino Roces) Pasong Tamo runs underneath the Magallanes Interchange. SB can access the road by staying on the rightmost lane. NB can access the road by a U-turn slot and staying on the SB rightmost lane. Pasong Tamo travellers can access NB EDSA by turning right beside the Magallanes Interchange and U-Turn slots can be used to access SB EDSA. Pasong Tamo NB goes to the Magallanes Factories and SB goes to the Dasmarinas Village. South Luzon Expressway Intersection Turbine Interchange (EDSA-Osmena) The 3 of the 4 SB lanes will split of from EDSA after crossing Pasong Tamo. Keeping Right takes you to both the either direction in SLEX, while on NB, 2 lanes lead to SB SLEX only. There is no access to NB SLEX from NB EDSA except from U-Turning to Southbound EDSA. NB SLEX goes to Manila and SB SLEX goes to Laguna, Cavite and Batangas. The Metro Manila Skyway can be accessed from EDSA by a ramp from SB SLEX. The Magallanes MRT Station is located near this intersection. 3 Aurora Boulevard Flyover (EDSA-Tramo) San Roque, Pasay City This Aurora Boulevard is diffrent from the Aurora Boulevard in Cubao. Because of the MRT Tracks, there is no access to SB EDSA from NB Aurora Boulevard, but there is a flyover from SB EDSA that provides access to SB Aurora Boulevard. Aurora Boulevard provides access to NAIA Terminal 3, NAIA domestic terminal, and is another route to SLEX and the Skyway. 2 Taft Avenue Intersection(MRT-LRT Rotunda) Baclaran, Pasay City This is a limited access intersection with Taft Avenue, which used to be a rotunda, then signalized, before the stoplights are removed recently because of the Traffic jams it caused. Northbound Taft Avenue takes you to Manila, South takes you to Baclaran. MRT Taft Avenue and LRT EDSA are located near this intersection. The MRT-3 ends in this intersection. 200px 2 F.B. Harrison/Quirino Avenue(P.Lovina-Pasay) This intersection with F.B. Harrison/Quirino Avenue has also been reconfigured so that going straight and turning right are your only choices. There are however plenty of nearby U-turn ramps. Southbound is another route to the Cavite Province and provides access to NAIA Domestic terminal and NAIA Terminal 3. Access from SB EDSA to SB Quirino Avenue can be obtained using Taft Avenue. Northbound takes you to Manila. 200px 1 Roxas Boulevard Intersection This exit at Roxas Boulevard was originally a fully signalized 4-lane intersection with a 4-lane flyover from Roxas Boulevard overhead, but due to the traffic jams it caused has been reconfigured with traffic cones and plastic highway barriers so as to allow you to go straight or turn right from EDSA. For NB EDSA travellers, exiting right takes you to Ninoy Aquino International Airport and Cavite, while Macapagal Boulevard can be used to access to NB Roxas Boulevard. And for SB EDSA travellers, exiting right takes you to Manila while Taft Avenue, Quirino Avenue, Airport Road and Macapagal Boulevard can be used to access SB Roxas Boulevard to Cavite. 1 Diosdado Macapagal Boulevard Intersection(EDSA-MOA) Reclamation Area, Pasay City This exit is a signalized intersection at Diosdado Macapagal Boulevard. There is also a stoplight in this intersection. Southbound takes you to Ninoy Aquino International Airport, Asia World City, the Manila-Cavite Expressway and Cavite. Northbound takes you to Star City Amusement Park and Pasay. 200px 0 Mall of Asia Roundabout(Globe Rotunda) A roundabout at the SM Mall of Asia marks the end of EDSA. Turning either direction on J.W. Diokno Boulevard provides access to the Mall of Asia. [ Future Developments ] EDSA, particularly in Cubao, Kamuning, Santolan and Munoz, is very prone to heavy traffics. That is why it is planned by the DPWH to complete all the interchanges in EDSA and create full Grade Separations along all its intersections with the Radial Roads it crosses, the Quezon Avenue, Aurora Boulevard, Shaw Boulevard, Kalayaan Avenue, Taft Avenue and Roxas Boulevard. The Magallanes Interchange also had been planned to be completed to allow NB EDSA to access NB SLEX.Creating a flyover over the North Avenue-West Avenue Intersection and Mindanao Avenue and a Flyover over Congressional and Roosevelt Avenue are already approved, and may start construction in 2013. { DPWH:Future PPP projects for EDSA } The MRT-3, (which currently ends in Taft Avenue ) is also being planned to be extended to the SM Mall of Asia.Due to rebranding issues, they are officially planning to make a new name to rebrand EDSA as Cory Aquino Avenue In honor of the former President Corazon Aquino, Bohol Representative Rene Lopez Relampagos filed House Bill (HB) 5422. The proposal is currently pending in the House of Representatives before the House Committee on Public Works and Highways, but the bill is still pending. the planning of the future name of EDSA is conceptualized in pre-late 2009 few weeks or months after the death of Cory Aquino. [ List of notable incidents and accidents along EDSA ] [ April 2012 ] Date Results December 30, 2000 On this terrorist attack in Rizal Day, a policeman was killed when a gasoline station exploded in EDSA-Makati. On the same day, a bus plying on EDSA-Cubao exploded, killing one passenger. September 28 to October 1, 2006 Typhoon Milenyo, most notably the ones at the Ortigas Avenue junction in Mandaluyong. After a month, some of the billboards were put up again, while others were confiscated by the Metro Manila Development Authority. November 30 to December 1, 2006 The number of billboard related incidents caused by Typhoon Milenyo led the government to plan the retraction and removal of billboards from Monumento to the SM Mall of Asia, as a precaution to Super Typhoon Reming which was forecast to pass over Metro Manila, potentially causing more damage. However, the typhoon did not directly hit the metropolis, but due to strong rain showers, many of the billboards remained. April 2 to 10, 2007 The billboard advertisements beside the Manila MRT were reported to have black paint thrown at them. On April 9, 2007, the MMDA removed the ads that were affected by the black paint. The government then planned to initiate a campaign to apprehend those who vandalized the billboards by means of advertising the offenses, and posted the advertisements from North Avenue, Quezon City to Taft Avenue in Pasay City. It was discovered later on that it was a criminal youth gang that was responsible for the billboard vandalisms. [ See also ] Metro Manila Major roads in Metro Manila MacArthur Highway Quirino Highway South Luzon Expressway North Luzon Expressway C-3 Road C-5 Road [ References ] [ Metro Manila ] Category:Roads in the Philippines Category:Historical roads Category:Circumferential Roads Category:Roads Category:Shopping districts and streets in the Philippines Category:Limited-access roads Category:Metro Manila Category:Quezon City br:Epifanio de los Santos Avenue (EDSA) ceb:Abenidang Epifanio de los Santos de:Epifanio de los Santos Avenue ilo:EDSA nl:Epifanio de los Santos Avenue tl:Abenida Epifanio de los Santos