[ the medieval principality the modern state Moldova other uses Moldova (disambiguation) ] [ Moldova(Ţara Moldovei) ( ro ) Principality of Moldavia Moldova Europe South-Eastern Europe Romania, Moldova, Ukraine Vassal Ottoman Empire Absolute monarchy Vassal of the Ottoman Empire (1514-1859) 1346 1859 Foundation of the Moldavian mark De JureUnion with Wallachia Possible Moldavian standard, during Stephen the Great United Principalities Flag of the United Principalities of Wallachia and Moldavia (1859 - 1862).svg Bukovina Wappen Herzogtum Bukowina.png Bessarabia Governorate Coat of arms of Bessarabia.png Flag_of_Moldavia.svg thumb Coat_of_arms_of_Moldavia.svg Moldova 1483 EnglishPNG.png Moldavia under Stephen the Great, 1483 Baia, Siret 1343-1388 Suceava 1388-1564 Iaşi (Jassy) 1564-1859 Romanian (commonly used, later official), Church Slavonic (in early official use) Language for inter-ethnic communication Russian Princes of Moldavia ( Voivode s, Hospodar s ) Dragoş 1346-1353 (first) Alexander John Cuza 1859-1862 (last) Taler ] Moldavia ( [ Moldova ] [ molˈdova pron ] ) is a geographic and historical region and former principality in Eastern Europe, corresponding to the territory between the Eastern Carpathians and the Dniester river. An initially independent and later autonomous state, it existed from the 14th century to 1859, when it united with Wallachia as the basis of the modern Romania n state; at various times, the state included the regions of Bessarabia (with the Budjak ), all of Bukovina and (under Stephen the Great ) Pokuttya. The western part of Moldavia is now part of Romania and the eastern part belongs to the Republic of Moldova, while the northern and south-eastern parts are territories of Ukraine. [ Name and etymology ] [ Etymology of Moldova ] The original and short-lived reference to the region was Bogdania, after Bogdan I, the founding figure of the principality. The names Moldavia and Moldova are derived from the name of the Moldova River; however, the etymology is not known and there are several variants: { Where did the name Moldova come from? } { Etymology of Moldova } [ a landowner by the name of Alexa Moldaowiczis mentioned in a 1334 document, as a local boyar in service to Yuriy II of Halych; this attests to the use of the name prior to the foundation of the Moldavian state, and could even be the source for the region&apos;s name. April 2010 ] a legend mentioned in Descriptio Moldaviae by Dimitrie Cantemir links it to an aurochs hunting trip of the Maramureş voivode Dragoş, and the latter&apos;s chase of a star-marked bull. Dragoş was accompanied by his female hound called Molda; when they reached shores of an unfamiliar river, Molda caught up with the animal and was killed by it. The dog&apos;s name would have been given to the river, and extended to the country. the old German Molde, meaning &quot; open-pit mine &quot; the Gothic Mulda (Gothic: 𐌼 𐌿 𐌻 𐌳 𐌰, Runic: ᛗᚢᛚᛞᚨ) meaning &quot; dust &quot;, &quot; dirt &quot; (cognate with the English mould ), referring to the river. a Slavic etymology (-ova is a quite common Slavic suffix), marking the end of one Slavic genitive form, denoting ownership, chiefly of feminine nouns (i.e.: &quot; that of Molda &quot; ). In several early references, { Ion Ciortan, Măriuca Radu, Octavian Ion Penda, Descriptio Romaniae (cartographie), National Museum of Maps &amp; old books, Autonomous regie Monitorul oficial, Bucharest 2004 } &quot; Moldavia &quot; is rendered under the composite form Moldo-Wallachia (in the same way Wallachia may appear as Hungro-Wallachia). Ottoman Turkish references to Moldavia included Boğdan Iflak (meaning &quot; Bogdan &apos;s Wallachia &quot; ) and Boğdan (and occasionally Kara-Boğdan - &quot; Black Bogdania &quot; ). See also: Name in other languages. The name of the region in other languages: [ Moldavie ], [ Moldau ], [ Moldva ], [ Молдавия, Moldaviya ], [ Boğdan Prensliği ] [ History ] [ October 2011 ] [ Early Middle Ages ] [ Origin of Romanians Romania in the Early Middle Ages ] In the early 13th century A.D., the Brodniks, a possible Slavic – Vlach vassal state of Halych, were present, alongside the Vlachs, in much of the region&apos;s territory (towards 1216, the Brodniks are mentioned as in service of Suzdal ). On the border between Halych and the Brodniks, in the 11th century, a Viking by the name of Rodfos was killed in the area by Vlachs who supposedly betrayed him. In 1164, the future Byzantine Emperor Andronicus I Comnenus, was taken prisoner by Vlach shepherds around the same region. [ High Middle Ages ] [ Foundation of Moldavia ] [ Romania in the Middle Ages Transylvania in the Middle Ages Wallachia in the Middle Ages ] { Neamţ Citadel } { Piatra Neamţ Citadel, showing the } { Wisent / } { Aurochs coat of arms of Moldavia. } { Căpriana Monastery (1429) } Later in the 13th century, King Charles I of Hungary attempted to expand his realm and the influence of the Roman Catholic Church eastwards after the fall of Cuman rule, and ordered a campaign under the command of Phynta de Mende (1324). In 1342 and 1345, the Hungarians were victorious in a battle against Tatars; the conflict was resolved by the death of Jani Beg, in 1357. The Polish chronicle r Jan Długosz mentioned Moldavians (under the name Wallachians) as having joined a military expedition in 1342, under King Władysław I, against the Margraviate of Brandenburg. { The Annals of Jan Długosz, p. 273 } In 1353, Dragoş, mentioned as a Vlach Knyaz in Maramureş, was sent by Louis I to establish a line of defense against the Golden Horde forces on the Siret River. This expedition resulted in a polity vassal to Hungary, centered around Baia (Târgul Moldovei or Moldvabánya). Bogdan of Cuhea, another Vlach voivode from Maramureş who had fallen out with the Hungarian king, crossed the Carpathians in 1359, took control of Moldavia, and succeeded in removing Moldavia from Hungarian control. His realm extended north to the Cheremosh River, while the southern part of Moldavia was still occupied by the Tatars. After first residing in Baia, Bogdan moved Moldavia&apos;s seat to Siret (it was to remain there until Petru Muşat moved it to Suceava; it was finally moved to Iaşi under Alexandru Lăpuşneanu - in 1565). The area around Suceava, roughly correspondent to future Bukovina, formed one of the two administrative divisions of the new realm, under the name Ţara de Sus (the &quot; Upper Land &quot; ), whereas the rest, on both sides of the Prut River, formed Ţara de Jos (the &quot; Lower Land &quot; ). Disfavored by the brief union of Angevin Poland and Hungary (the latter was still the country&apos;s overlord), Bogdan&apos;s successor Laţcu accepted conversion to Roman Catholicism around 1370, but his gesture was to remain without consequences. Despite remaining officially Eastern Orthodox and culturally connected with the Byzantine Empire after 1382, princes of the Muşatin family entered a conflict with the Constantinople Patriarchy over control of appointments to the newly founded Moldavian Metropolitan seat; Patriarch Antony IV even cast an anathema over Moldavia after Roman I expelled his appointee back to Byzantium. The crisis was finally settled in favor of the Moldavian princes under Alexandru cel Bun. Nevertheless, religious policy remained complex: while conversions to faiths other than Orthodox were discouraged (and forbidden for princes), Moldavia included sizable Roman Catholic communities ( Germans and Hungarians ), as well as non-Chalcedonic Armenians; after 1460, the country welcomed Hussite refugees (founders of Ciuburciu and, probably, Huşi ). The principality of Moldavia covered the entire geographic region of Moldavia. In various periods, various other territories were politically connected with the Moldavian principality. This is the case of the province of Pokuttya, the fiefdoms of Cetatea de Baltă and Ciceu (both in Transylvania ) or, at a later date, the territories between the Dniester and the Bug Rivers. Petru I profited from the end of the Hungarian-Polish union, and moved the country closer to the Jagiellon realm, becoming a vassal of Władysław II on September 26, 1387. This gesture was to have unexpected consequences: Petru supplied the Polish ruler with funds needed in the war against the Teutonic Knights, and was granted control over Pokuttya until the debt was to be repaid; as this is not recorded to have been carried out, the region became disputed by the two states, until it was lost by Moldavia in the Battle of Obertyn (1531). Prince Petru also expanded his rule southwards to the Danube Delta, and established a frontier with Wallachia [ January 2007 ]; his brother Roman I conquered the Hungarian-ruled Cetatea Albă in 1392, giving Moldavia an outlet to the Black Sea, before being toppled from the throne for supporting Theodor Koriatovich in his conflict with Vytautas the Great of Lithuania. Under Stephen I, growing Polish influence was challenged by Sigismund of Hungary, whose expedition was defeated at Ghindăoani in 1385; however, Stephen disappeared in mysterious circumstances, and the throne was soon occupied by Yury Koriatovich [ January 2007 ] (Vytautas&apos; favorite). Alexandru cel Bun, although brought to the throne in 1400 by the Hungarians (with assistance from Mircea I of Wallachia ), shifted his allegiances towards Poland (notably engaging Moldavian forces on the Polish side in the Battle of Grunwald and the Siege of Marienburg ), and placed his own choice of rulers in Wallachia. His reign was one of the most successful in Moldavia&apos;s history, but also saw the very first confrontation with the Ottoman Turks at Cetatea Albă in 1420, and later even a conflict with the Poles. A deep crisis was to follow Alexandru&apos;s long reign, with his successors battling each other in a succession of wars that divided the country until the murder of Bogdan II and the ascension of Petru Aron in 1451. Nevertheless, Moldavia was subject to further Hungarian interventions after that moment, as Matthias Corvinus deposed Aron and backed Alexăndrel to the throne in Suceava. Petru Aron&apos;s rule also signified the beginning of Moldavia&apos;s Ottoman Empire allegiance, as the ruler agreed to pay tribute to Sultan Mehmed II. [ Late Middle Ages ] { Suceava Seat Fortress } [ Stephen the Great ] Under Stephen the Great, who took the throne and subsequently came to an agreement with Kazimierz IV of Poland in 1457, the state reached its most glorious period. Stephen blocked Hungarian interventions in the Battle of Baia, invaded Wallachia in 1471, and dealt with Ottoman reprisals in a major victory (the 1475 Battle of Vaslui ); after feeling threatened by Polish ambitions, he also attacked Galicia and resisted Polish reprisals in the Battle of the Cosmin Forest (1497). However, he had to surrender Chilia (Kiliya) and Cetatea Albă (Bilhorod-Dnistrovs&apos;kyi), the two main fortresses in the Bujak, to the Ottomans in 1484, and in 1498 he had to accept Ottoman suzereignty, when he was forced to agree to continue paying tribute to Sultan Bayezid II. Following the taking of Hotin (Khotyn) and Pokuttya, Stephen&apos;s rule also brought a brief extension of Moldavian rule into Transylvania : Cetatea de Baltă and Ciceu became his fiefs in 1489. [ Early Modern Era and Renaissance ] [ Early Modern Romania ] [ Early Modern Wallachia Early Modern Transylvania ] Under Bogdan III cel Orb, Ottoman overlordship was confirmed in the shape that would rapidly evolve into control over Moldavia&apos;s affairs. Petru Rareş, who reigned in the 1530s and 1540s, clashed with the Habsburg Monarchy over his ambitions in Transylvania (losing possessions in the region to George Martinuzzi ), was defeated in Pokuttya by Poland, and failed in his attempt to extricate Moldavia from Ottoman rule – the country lost Bender to the Ottomans, who included it in their Silistra Eyalet. { Hotin Fortress on the } { Dniester River, bordering the northern frontier } A period of profound crisis followed. Moldavia stopped issuing its own coinage circa 1520, under Prince Ştefăniţă, when it was confronted with rapid depletion of funds and rising demands from the Porte. Such problems became endemic when the country, brought into the Great Turkish War, suffered the impact of the Stagnation of the Ottoman Empire; at one point, during the 1650s and 1660s, princes began relying on counterfeit coinage (usually copies of Swedish riksdaler s, as was that issued by Eustratie Dabija ). The economic decline was accompanied by a failure to maintain state structures: the feudal -based Moldavian military forces were no longer convoked, and the few troops maintained by the rulers remained professional mercenaries such as the seimeni. However, Moldavia and the similarly affected Wallachia remained both important sources of income for the Ottoman Empire and relatively prosperous agricultural economies (especially as suppliers of grain and cattle – the latter was especially relevant in Moldavia, which remained an under-populated country of pasture s ). In time, much of the resources were tied to the Ottoman economy, either through monopolies on trade which were only lifted in 1829, after the Treaty of Adrianople (which did not affect all domains directly), or through the raise in direct tax es - the one demanded by the Ottomans from the princes, as well as the ones demanded by the princes from the country&apos;s population. Taxes were directly proportional with Ottoman requests, but also with the growing importance of Ottoman appointment and sanctioning of princes in front of election by the boyars and the boyar Council – Sfatul boieresc (drawing in a competition among pretenders, which also implied the intervention of creditors as suppliers of bribe s ). The fiscal system soon included taxes such as the văcărit (a tax on head of cattle), first introduced by Iancu Sasul in the 1580s. Moldavia (in orange) towards the end of the 16th century The economic opportunities offered brought about a significant influx of Greek and Levant ine financiers and officials, who entered a stiff competition with the high boyars over appointments to the Court. As the manor system suffered the blows of economic crises, and in the absence of salarisation (which implied that persons in office could decide their own income), obtaining princely appointment became the major focus of a boyar&apos;s career. Such changes also implied the decline of free peasantry and the rise of serfdom, as well as the rapid fall in the importance of low boyars (a traditional institution, the latter soon became marginal, and, in more successful instances, added to the population of towns); however, they also implied a rapid transition towards a monetary economy, based on exchanges in foreign currency. Serfdom was doubled by the much less numerous slave population, composed of migrant Roma and captured Nogais. { Trei Ierarhi Monastery, housed The } { Vasilian College, an institution of higher learning founded in 1640 } The conflict between princes and boyars was to become exceptionally violent – the latter group, who frequently appealed to the Ottoman court in order to have princes comply with its demands, was persecuted by rulers such as Alexandru Lăpuşneanu and Ioan Vodă cel Cumplit. Ioan Vodă&apos;s revolt against the Ottomans ended in his execution (1574). The country descended into political chaos, with frequent Ottoman and Tatar incursions and pillages. The claims of Muşatins to the crown and the traditional system of succession were ended by scores of illegitimate reigns; one of the usurpers, Ioan Iacob Heraclid, was a Protestant Greek who encouraged the Renaissance and attempted to introduce Lutheranism to Moldavia. In 1595, the rise of the Movileşti boyars to the throne with Ieremia Movilă coincided with the start of frequent anti-Ottoman and anti- Habsburg military expeditions of the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth into Moldavian territory (see Moldavian Magnate Wars ), and rivalries between pretenders to the Moldavian throne encouraged by the three competing powers. The Wallachian prince Michael the Brave deposed Prince Ieremia in 1600, and managed to become the very first monarch to unite Moldavia, Wallachia, and Transylvania under his rule; the episode ended in Polish conquests of lands down to Bucharest, soon ended by the outbreak of the Polish-Swedish War and the reestablishment of Ottoman rule. Polish incursions were dealt a blow by the Ottomans during the 1620 Battle of Cecora, which also saw an end to the reign of Gaspar Graziani. The following period of relative peace saw the more prosperous and prestigious rule of Vasile Lupu, who took the throne as a boyar appointee in 1637, and began battling his rival Gheorghe Ştefan, as well as the Wallachian prince Matei Basarab – however, his invasion of Wallachia with the backing of Cossack Hetman Bohdan Khmelnytsky ended in disaster at the Battle of Finta (1653). A few years later, Moldavia was occupied for two short intervals by the anti-Ottoman Wallachian prince Constantin Şerban, who clashed with the first ruler of the Ghica family, Gheorghe Ghica. In the early 1680s, Moldavian troops under George Ducas intervened in Right-bank Ukraine and assisted Mehmed IV in the Battle of Vienna, only to suffer the effects of the Great Turkish War. [ Phanariots (1711-1822) ] [ Phanariotes History of the Russo-Turkish wars ] { Wallachia in 1786, Italian map by G. Pittori, since the geographer Giovanni Antonio Rizzi Zannoni. } { Jassy (Iaşi) in 1788 by the Russian army } During the late 17th century, Moldavia became the target of the Russian Empire &apos;s southwards expansion, inaugurated by Peter the Great during the Russo-Turkish War of 1710-1711; Prince Dimitrie Cantemir &apos;s siding with Peter and open anti-Ottoman rebellion, ended in defeat at Stănileşti, provoked Sultan Ahmed III &apos;s reaction, and the official discarding of recognition of local choices for princes, imposing instead a system which relied solely on Ottoman approval – the Phanariote epoch, inaugurated by the reign of Nicholas Mavrocordatos. Short and frequently ended through violence, Phanariote rules were usually marked by political corruption, intrigue, and high taxation, as well as by sporadic incursions of Habsburg and Russian armies deep into Moldavian territory; nonetheless, they also saw attempts at legislative and administrative modernization inspired by The Enlightenment (such as Constantine Mavrocordatos &apos; decision to salirize public offices, to the outrage of boyars, and the abolition of serfdom in 1749, as well as Scarlat Callimachi &apos;s Code), and signified a decrease in Ottoman demands after the threat of Russian annexation became real and the prospects of a better life led to waves of peasant emigration to neighboring lands. The effects of Ottoman control were also made less notable after the 1774 Treaty of Kucuk Kaynarca allowed Russia to intervene in favour of Ottoman subjects of the Eastern Orthodox faith - leading to campaigns of petition ing by the Moldavian boyars against princely policies. Principality of Moldavia, 1793-1812, highlighted in orange In 1712, Hotin was taken over by the Ottomans, and became part of a defensive system that Moldavian princes were required to maintain, as well as an area for Islam ic colonization (the Laz community). Moldavia also lost Bukovina, Suceava included, to the Habsburgs in 1772, which meant both an important territorial loss and a major blow to the cattle trade (as the region stood on the trade route to Central Europe ). The 1792 Treaty of Jassy forced the Ottoman Empire to cede all of its holdings in what is now Transnistria to Russia, which made Russian presence much more notable, given that the Empire acquired a common border with Moldavia. The first effect of this was the cession of Bessarabia to the Russian Empire, in 1812 (through the Treaty of Bucharest ). [ Organic Statute, 1848 revolution, and union with Wallachia ] [ National awakening of Romania Organic Statute Moldavian Revolution of 1848 Wallachian Revolution of 1848 ] { The Princely Palace of Moldavia } Phanariote rules were officially ended after the 1821 occupation of the country by Alexander Ypsilantis &apos; Filiki Eteria during the Greek War of Independence; the subsequent Ottoman retaliation brought the rule of Ioan Sturdza, considered as the first one of a new system – especially since, in 1826, the Ottomans and Russia agreed to allow for the election by locals of rulers over the two Danubian Principalities, and convened on their mandating for seven-year terms. In practice, a new fundament to reigns in Moldavia was created by the Russo-Turkish War of 1828-1829, and a period of Russian domination over the two countries which ended only in 1856: begun as a military occupation under the command of Pavel Kiselyov, Russian domination gave Wallachia and Moldavia, which were not removed from nominal Ottoman control, the modernizing Organic Statute (the first document resembling a constitution, as well as the first one to regard both principalities). After 1829, the country also became an important destination for immigration of Ashkenazi Jews from the Kingdom of Galicia and Lodomeria and areas of Russia (see History of the Jews in Romania and Sudiţi ). { Obelisk of Lions (1834), dedicated to the Organic Statute } The first Moldavian rule established under the Statute, that of Mihail Sturdza, was nonetheless ambivalent: eager to reduce abuse of office. Sturdza introduced reforms (the abolition of slavery, secularization, economic rebuilding), but he was widely seen as enforcing his own power over that of the newly instituted consultative Assembly. A supporter of the union of his country with Wallachia and of Romanian Romantic nationalism, he obtained the establishment of a customs union between the two countries (1847) and showed support for radical projects favored by low boyars; nevertheless, he clamped down with noted violence the Moldavian revolutionary attempt in the last days of March 1848. Grigore Alexandru Ghica allowed the exiled revolutionaries to return to Moldavia cca. 1853, which led to the creation of Partida Naţională (the &quot; National Party &quot; ), a trans-boundary group of radical union supporters which campaigned for a single state under a foreign dynasty. Moldavia (in orange) after 1856 Russian domination ended abruptly after the Crimean War, when the Treaty of Paris passed the two principalities under the tutelage of Great European Powers (together with Russia and the Ottoman overlord, power-sharing included the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, the Austrian Empire, the French Empire, the Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia, and Prussia ). Due to Austrian and Ottoman opposition and British reserves, the union program as demanded by radical campaigners was debated intensely. In September 1857, given that Caimacam Nicolae Vogoride had perpetrated fraud in elections in Moldavia in July, [ January 2007 ] the Powers allowed the two states to convene Ad-hoc divans, which were to decide a new constitutional framework; the result showed overwhelming support for the union, as the creation of a liberal and neutral state. After further meetings among leaders of tutor states, an agreement was reached (the Paris Convention), whereby a limited union was to be enforced – separate governments and thrones, with only two bodies (a Court of Cassation and a Central Commission residing in Focşani ); it also stipulated that an end to all privilege was to be passed into law, and awarded back to Moldavia the areas around Bolhrad, Cahul, and Izmail. However, the Convention failed to note whether the two thrones could not be occupied by the same person, allowing Partida Naţională to introduce the candidacy of Alexander John Cuza in both countries. On January 17 (January 5, 1859 Old Style ), in Iaşi, he was elected prince of Moldavia by the respective electoral body. After street pressure over the much more conservative body in Bucharest, Cuza was elected in Wallachia as well (February 5/January 24). Exactly three years later, after diplomatic missions that helped remove opposition to the action, the formal union created the United Principalities (the basis of modern Romania) and instituted Cuza as Domnitor (all legal matters were clarified after the replacement of the prince with Carol of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen in April 1866, and the creation of an independent Kingdom of Romania in 1881) - this officially ending the existence of the Principality of Moldavia. [ Slavery ] Slavery ( [ robie ] ) was part of the social order from before the founding of the Principality of Moldavia, until it was abolished in stages during the 1840s and 1850s. Most of the slaves were of Roma (Gypsy) ethnicity. There were also slaves of Tatar ethnicity, probably prisoners captured from the wars with the Nogai and Crimean Tatars. The institution of slavery was first attested in a 1470 Moldavian document, through which Prince Stephan the Great frees Oană, a Tatar slave who had fled to Jagiellon Poland. { Viorel Achim, The Roma in Romanian History, } { Central European University Press, Budapest, 2004, ISBN 963-9241-84-9 } The exact origins of slavery are not known, slavery being a common practice in Europe at the time. In the Byzantine Empire, they were slaves of the state and it seems the situation was the same in Bulgaria and Serbia until their social organization was changed by the Ottoman conquest. Historian Nicolae Iorga associated the Roma people&apos;s arrival with the 1241 Mongol invasion of Europe and considered their slavery as a vestige of that era, the Romanians taking the Roma from the Mongols as slaves and preserving their status. Other historians consider that they were enslaved while captured during the battles with the Tatars. The practice of enslaving prisoners may also have been taken from the Mongols. The ethnic identity of the &quot; Tatar slaves &quot; is unknown, they could have been captured Tatars of the Golden Horde, Cumans, or the slaves of Tatars and Cumans. While it is possible that some Romani people were slaves or auxiliary troops of the Mongols or Tatars, the bulk of them came from south of the Danube, making slavery a widespread practice. The Tatar slaves, smaller in numbers, were eventually merged into the Roma population. { Ştefan Ştefănescu, Istoria medie a României, Vol. I, Editura Universităţii din Bucureşti, Bucharest, 1991 } Traditionally, Roma slaves were divided into three categories. The smallest was owned by the hospodars, and went by the Romanian-language name of ţigani domneşti ( &quot; Gypsies belonging to the lord &quot; ). The two other categories comprised ţigani mănăstireşti ( &quot; Gypsies belonging to the monasteries &quot; ), who were the property of Romanian Orthodox and Greek Orthodox monasteries, and ţigani boiereşti ( &quot; Gypsies belonging to the boyars &quot; ), who were enslaved by the category of landowners. { Neagu Djuvara, Între Orient şi Occident. Ţările române la începutul epocii moderne, } { Humanitas, Bucharest, 1995. ISBN 973-28-0523-4 } { Will Guy, Between Past and Future: The Roma of Central and Eastern Europe, } { University of Hertfordshire Press, Hatfield, 2001. ISBN 1-902806-07-7 } The abolition of slavery was carried out following a campaign by young revolutionaries who embraced the liberal ideas of the Enlightenment. In 1844, Moldavian Prince Mihail Sturdza proposed a law on the freeing of slaves owned by the church and state. By the 1850s, the movement gained support from almost the whole of Romanian society, and, in December 1855, following a proposal by Prince Grigore Alexandru Ghica, a bill drafted by Mihail Kogălniceanu and Petre Mavrogheni was adopted by the Divan; the law emancipated all slaves to the status of taxpayers (citizens). Support for the abolitionists was reflected in Romanian literature of the mid-19h century. The issue of the Roma slavery became a theme in the literary works of various liberal and Romantic intellectuals, many of whom were active in the abolitionist camp. The Romanian abolitionist movement was also influenced by the much larger movement against Black slavery in the United States through press reports and through a translation of Harriet Beecher Stowe &apos;s Uncle Tom&apos;s Cabin. Translated by Theodor Codrescu and first published in Iaşi in 1853, under the name Coliba lui Moşu Toma sau Viaţa negrilor în sudul Statelor Unite din America (which translates back as &quot; Uncle Toma&apos;s Cabin or the Life of Blacks in the Southern United States of America &quot; ), it was the first American novel to be published in Romanian, and it included a foreword study on slavery by Mihail Kogălniceanu. [ Geography ] [ Moldavian Plateau ] Geographically, Moldavia is limited by the Carpathian Mountains to the West, the Cheremosh River to the North, the Dniester River to the East and the Danube and Black Sea to the South. The Prut River flows approximately through its middle from north to south. Of late 15th century Moldavia, with an area of approximately [ 97000 km2 sqmi on ], the biggest part is located in Romania (47.5%), followed by the Republic of Moldova (30.5%) and Ukraine (22%). This represents 88% of the Republic of Moldova&apos;s surface, 19.5% of Romania&apos;s surface, and 3.5% of Ukraine&apos;s surface. The region is mostly hilly, with a range of mountains in the west, and plain areas in the southeast. Moldavia&apos;s highest altitude is Ineu peak (2,279m), which is also the westernmost point of the region. [ Population ] [ Historical population ] [ Demographic history of Romania Bessarabia#Population Bukovina#Historical_population Chernivtsi_Oblast#Population_and_Demographics Budjak#Ethnic_groups_and_demographics ] Contemporary historians estimate the populatian of the Moldavian Principality in the 15th century, at between 250,000 - 600,000 people, { East Central Europe in the Middle Ages, 1000-1500, Jean W. Sedlar, page 255, 1994 } { Cavalerii Apocalipsului: Calamitatile Naturale Din Trecutul Romaniei (Pana La 1800), Paul Cernovodeanu, Paul Binder, 1993, ISBN 973-95477-3-7, Romanian Edition } but an extensive catagraphy was first conducted in 1769-1774. { First activities of population counting conducted on the Romanian territory of today } In 1848, the northwestern part, annexed in 1775 by the Habsburg Empire, Bukovina, had a population of 377,571; in 1856, the eastern half of Moldavia, Bessarabia, annexed in 1812 by the Russian Empire, had a population of 990,274, while the population of Moldavia proper (the western half), in 1859, was 1,463,927. { Moldavians at the 2002 census } [ Current population ] According to the latest Romanian Census (2002), { Institutul Naţional de Statistică } Moldovan Census (2004) { National Bureau of Statistics of Moldova } and Ukrainian Census (2001) { Ukrcensus } data, the region has a total population of approximately 9,700,000 inhabitants, 48% of them living in Romania, 36% in Moldova and 16% in Ukraine, distributed among the ethnic groups as follows: Chernivtsi Oblast - Ukrainians (75%), Romanians 1 (12.5%), Moldovans 1 (7.3%), Russians (4.1%), others (1.1%); Budjak (part of Odessa Oblast ) - Ukrainians (40.1%), Bulgarians (20.9%), Russians (20.1%), Moldovans 1 (12.6%), Gagauzians (4%), others 2 (2.3%). 1 There is an ongoing dispute over whether Romanians and Moldovans are the same ethnic group, namely whether Moldovans&apos; self-identification constitutes an ethnic group distinct and apart from Romanians or a subset. At the Moldovan and Ukrainian censa, citizens could declare only one nationality. Consequently, one could not declare oneself both Moldovan and Romanian. 2 Includes people who declared themselves as Romanians. [ Cities ] The largest cities (as per last censuses) in the Moldavia region are: Iaşi (Jassy) (320,888) Galaţi (298,861) Bacău (175,500) Botoşani (115,070) Suceava (105,865) Piatra Neamţ (104,914) Focşani (101,854) { Moldova: } Chişinău (589,446) Bălţi (122,669) Tighina (Bender) (97,027) { Ukraine: } Chernivtsi (Cernăuţi) (236,700) Izmail (Ismail) (84,800) [ Flags and historical coats of arms ] [ Flag and coat of arms of Moldavia ] Moldavian 15th century battle flag Coat of arms of the Prince of Moldavia, in the Wijsbergen arms book Coat of arms of the principality of Moldavia, at the Cetăţuia Monastery in Iaşi Coat of arms of the Prince of Moldavia, on the Suceava bell [ See also ] Bessarabia Bukovina Budjak Hertza region History of Moldova History of Romania List of rulers of Moldavia Moldavian military forces Painted churches of northern Moldavia [ References ] Gheorghe I. Brătianu, Sfatul domnesc şi Adunarea Stărilor în Principatele Române, Bucharest, 1995 Vlad Georgescu, Istoria ideilor politice româneşti (1369-1878), Munich, 1987 Ştefan Ştefănescu, Istoria medie a României, Bucharest, 1991 [ External links ] [ Moldavia ] Dimitrie Cantemir-Descrierea Moldovei The Princely Court in Bacău - images, layouts (at the Romanian Group for an Alternative History Website ) Original Documents concerning both Moldavia and other Romania Principalities during the Middle Ages (at the Romanian Group for an Alternative History Website ) Pilgrimage and Cultural Heritage Tourism in Moldavia Painted Churches in Bukovina Medieval Coins of Moldavia and Wallachia [ Vassals ] Category:1859 disestablishments Category:States and territories established in 1346 Category:Ottoman period in the history of Romania Category:Ottoman period in the history of Moldova ar:مولدافيا (إقليم) bg:Молдова (област) br:Moldavia ca:Moldàvia cs:Moldávie da:Moldavien (Rumænien) de:Moldau (Region) eo:Moldavujo fa:مولدووا fr:Région de Moldavie ko:몰다비아 hr:Moldavija id:Moldavia it:Moldavia (regione storica) he:נסיכות מולדובה lv:Moldāvija hu:Moldva mk:Молдавија (регион) ja:モルダヴィア no:Moldova (region) nn:Moldavia oc:Moldàvia (region) pl:Mołdawia (kraina historyczna) ro:Moldova ru:Молдавское княжество sr:Молдавија (покрајина) fi:Moldova (historiallinen alue) sv:Moldova (Rumänien) th:มอลเดเวีย tr:Boğdan uk:Молдавське князівство zh:摩爾達維亞