{ Temple of Vesta &quot; (true dedication unknown) in } { Tivoli, Italy, c. 1858. } [ 259px ] Vesta is the virgin goddess of the hearth, home, and family in Roman religion. Vesta&apos;s presence is symbolized by the sacred fire that burned at her hearth and temples. Her closest Greek equivalent is Hestia. The importance of Vesta to Roman religion is indicated by the prominence of the priesthood devoted to her, the Vestal Virgins, Rome&apos;s only college of full-time priests. [ Etymology ] Georges Dumézil (1898–1986), a French comparative philologist, surmised that { G. Dumezil La religion Romaine archaique Paris 1974, part2, chap.2 } { E. Benveniste Le vocabulaire des institutions indo-europeens Paris, 1969 ( } { glottologist } { Emil Benveniste speaks on } { Georges Dumezil &apos;s theory) } the name of the goddess derives from Indoeuropean root *h₁eu-, via the derivative form *h₁eu-s- which alternates with *h₁w-es-. The former is found in Greek &apos;heuei&apos;, Lat. &apos;urit&apos;, &apos;ustio&apos; and Vedic &apos;osathi&apos; all conveying burning and the second is found in &apos;Vesta&apos;, Greek &apos;Hestia&apos;. See also Gallic Celtic &apos;visc&apos; fire. [ Theology ] Vesta is the goddess of the hearth of the city of Rome. Dumézil { G. Dumézil La religion Romaine archaique Paris, 1974, part 2, chap. 2 } draws a comparison between Roman religious conceptions and rituals and the relevant aspects of Vedic religion. Sacrificial ritual in Vedic India, required the presence of three fires, two of them being essential. { L. Renou &quot; Etudes Vediques &quot;, 5 Journal Asiatique 243, 1955, pp. 426-427 } The so called hearth of the landlord marks the connection to Earth of the offerer, i.e. is the marker of the origin of everything in the ritual act. In Vedic ritual such kind of fire must be round as Earth itself is round and also because on Earth there is no distinction in direction without reference to Heaven. The sacrificial fire, on the contrary, must be quadrangular as it is intended to convey the sacrificial offer to Heaven in the form of smoke. These two fires were laid on a West-East line. The third fire had the function of protecting the offerers from attacks of evil spirits and was placed to the South, considered a dangerous direction. Dumézil elaborates that in Rome the whole site of the city itself was considered as an extended sacrificial ground, { A. Magdelain Recherches sur l&apos;imperium, la loi curiate et les auspices d&apos;investiture 1968, pp. 57-67 } with the temple of Vesta performing the function of hearth of the landlord and other temples that of sacrificial fires. He remarks that the temple of Vesta was the only ancient temple in Rome to be built in a round shape and covered with a dome to protect the sacred fire from rain, other temples being quadrangular. Ancient Romans as well as other Indoeuropean people believed Earth is a sphere. Every temple however had to have two fires of which one was a hearth (Latin focus), representative of the fire (Latin foculus) of Vesta as the hearth of the city, and the main was the sacrificial ara. In this conception the function of defensive fire was performed by the temple of the god Vulcanus that was situated to the South of the pomerium, sacred city wall, this location being in accord with what could be expected from the homology with the Vedic situation. The Aedes Vestae and the Ignis Vestae being the Hearth of the city of Rome guaranteed its connexion to Earth and its permanence in history. It did not need to be inaugurated as other temples since it was an aedes, not a templum, its power and function being totally limited to Earth and bearing no relationship to Heaven or its directions.In other words its function was exclusively terrestrial, implying stability and lasting over time. It is noteworthy that the sacred fire, as standing for and representing the terrestrial origin of the community, could be lit only by the friction of two pieces of wood, one of them being necessarily an arbor felix auspicious tree, (probably an oak) { J. G. Frazer The golden bough abridged version 1913. } and cave in shape. Water was not allowed into the inner aedes nor could stay longer than the indispensable time on the nearby premises. It was carried by the Vestales in vessels called futiles which had a tiny foot that made them unstable. { G. Dumezil above } Quite a number of rules of the aedes Vestae we know about can be explained by the interpretation of the significance of homologous rules in Vedic rituals concerning the hearth of the landlord. In conclusion, Vesta is a symbol and a protector of Rome and its site, the hearth of the great Roman family. According to Ovid, Vesta is indeed the Earth itself, the sacred sphere (orbs) that makes life possible as we know it: &quot; Vesta is the Earth itself, both have the perennial fire, the Earth and the sacred Fire show their see. &quot; { Ovid, Fas. VI, 269 } The space within which men lived had to be marked and protected by a sacred fire. The sacrality of fire is related to the belief that it is the element at the origin of Earth (the central fire within), of every life on Earth and that connects our world with the divine one. The sacral function of fire is reflected by the peculiar relationship of the Vestals with the rex whom they ritually apostrophated once a year with the phrase: &quot; Vigilasne rex? Vigila! &quot; { Serv. Ad Aen. X 228 } and their accompanying the Pontifex Maximus in various rites. { e.g. Hor. Carm. 3, 30, 8; the rites of the } { Opiconsivia in the } { Regia. } The atrium Vestae too is frequently called regal. The sacred flames of the hearth were believed to be indispensable for the preservation and continuity of the Roman State: Cicero states it explicitly. The purity of the flames symbolised the vital force that is the root of the life of the community. It was also because the virgins&apos; ritual concern extended to the agricultural cycle and ensured a good harvest that Vesta enjoyed the title of Mater Mother. { A. Brelich &quot; Vesta &quot; Albae Vigiliae n. s. 7 (Zurich 1949) p. 48-66 as cited by D. P. Harmon &quot; Religion in Latin Elegists &quot; Aufstieg und Niedergang der Römische Welt 1986 p. 1971 } This connection between the sacred fire, Earth and life on it is also the reason why the Vestals guilty of unchastity were condemned to be buried alive, an expiation conceived to be a token of their belonging to Earth and of reparation towards it. Chastity as unspent power to give birth, owing to a concentration of vital energy, was in ritual use transferred to flocks and fields: the purity of fire was a symbol of such a concentration of vital energy. { A. Brelich above p. 259-277 } { Ovid Fasti VI, 458-460 } The Aedes was solemnly swept once a year, on June 15, the last day of the Vestalia. That day was named Q(uando) S(tercum) D(elatum) F(as): since the temple site in historic times was obviously kept clean, this expression is an heritage of high antiquity, an archaic fossil ritual reminiscent of a time when really the sweeping implied the removal of animal droppings. In the light of this theology it is noteworthy that Vesta is always invoked as the last in all ritual formulas concerning one or more gods (Vesta extrema), while Janus, the god of beginnings and passages, associated with Heaven, is always invoked at the beginning. This use is comparable to that concerning Agni in the Rig Veda : Agni is invoked first or last or at both places. In Iran ian rituals Atar is always invoked at the end. [ Comparative interpretation ] Dumézil hints to the significance of fire as the origin and bearer of life in connection to Vesta. Its talismanic value was the reason that caused the accumulation of signa fatalia or pignora harboured in the innermost part of the penus. Servius gives a list of seven, three of which from Troy. { Servius Aeneis VII 188. } The earliest collection was limited and kept secret, though according to Pliny { Pliny the Elder Naturalis Historia XXVIII 39. } the function of fertility was represented by the image of a male sex organ. The correspondence of Vesta with Vedic god Agni was noted long ago. { Numa-Denis Fustel de Coulange La cité antique 1864. } Dumézil recalls that in the Indian epic poem Mahabharata the episodes of Karttikeya, god of war and son of Agni { Mahabh. 14, 291-292. } and of Agni and the daughters of Nila { Mahabh. 2, 1124-1163. } bear the same theme of the flames as the sex organ of the god. The fecundating power of sacred fire is testified in Latin mythology in one version of the birth of Romulus, { Plutarch Rom. 2, 7. } that of the birth of king Servius Tullius { Dionysius of Halicarnassus IV 2, 1-4; Ovid Fasti VI, 633-636. } (in which his mother Ocresia becomes pregnant after sitting upon a phallus that appeared among the ashes of the ara of god Vulcanus, by order of Tanaquil wife of king Tarquinius Priscus ) and that of the birth of Caeculus, the founder of Praeneste. { Serv. Ad Aen. VII 678; Angelo Brelich Vesta 1949, pp.70, 97-98. } All these mythical or semilegendary characters show a mystical mastership of fire. E.g. Servius&apos;s hair was kindled by his father without hurting him, his statue in the temple of Fortuna Primigenia was unharmed by fire after his assassination. { Ovid, Fas. VI 625-626. } Caeculus kindled and exstinguished fires at will. In Vedic India the same complex appears as a quality of the divine twins, the Nasatya : they allowed a hero to survive in a basin of fire into which he had been thrown and enjoy the bathing as pleasant. A much later episode of Roman history has been detected as a revised replication of the same early mythologem. In the fire of the temple of Vesta of the year 241 BC Lucius Caecilius Metellus, and at the time pontifex maximus, saved the palladium, to which men were not allowed, and according to tradition was blinded in the incident. { Ovid Fas. VI 437-454. } Modern scholars have speculated that it would be impossible to cover offices as pontifex and consul for a blind man for more than twenty years. It has been suggested that this episode should be interpreted in the light of the connexionof the gens Caecilia with Caeculus, the founder of Praeneste. { Angelo Brelich &quot; Il mito nella storia di Cecilio Metello &quot; Studi e Materiali di Storia delle Religioni, 1939, pp. 30-41. } The use of the story of this incident is paradigmatic of how archaic mythologems common to Indoeuropean heritage were reused over time grafted onto history. [ Vestales ] { Promptuarii Iconum Insigniorum &quot; } Vesta&apos;s (in some versions she is called Vestia) fire was guarded at her Temples by her priest esses, the Vestales. Every March 1 the fire was renewed. It burned until 391, when the Emperor Theodosius I forbade public pagan worship. One of the Vestales mentioned in mythology is Rhea Silvia, who with the God Mars conceived Romulus and Remus (see founding of Rome ). The Vestales were one of the few full-time clergy positions in Roman religion. They were drawn from the patrician class and had to observe absolute chastity for 30 years. It was from this that the Vestales were named the Vestal virgins. They could not show excessive care of their person, and they were not allowed to let the fire go out. The Vestal Virgins lived together in a house near the Forum (Atrium Vestae), supervised by the Pontifex Maximus. On becoming a priestess, a Vestal Virgin was legally emancipated from her father&apos;s authority { Gaius 1,145 } and swore a vow of chastity for 30 years. { Plut. Numa 10,2 } { Dion. Hal. 2,67,2 } This vow was so sacred that if it were broken, the Vestal was buried alive in the Campus Sceleris (&apos;Field of Wickedness&apos;). It is likely that this is what happened to Rhea Silvia. They were also very independent and had many privileges that normal women did not have. They could move around the city but had to be in a carriage. { Gaius 1,145 } { Plut. Numa 10, 4 } { Gell. Noct. Att. 1, 12,9; 7,2 } The Vestales had a strict relationship with the rex sacrorum and flamen dialis as is shown in the verses of Ovid about their taking the februae (lanas: woolen threads) from the king and the flamen. { Ovid Fas. 2, 21 } Their relationship with the king is also apparent in the ritual phrase: &quot; Vigilasne rex, vigila! &quot; by which they apostrophated him once a year on an unknown occasion.The sacrality of their functions is well compounded by Cicero&apos;s opinion that without them Rome could not exist as it would not be able to keep in contact with the gods. { Cicero Font. 48. } A peculiar duty of the Vestals was the preparation and conservation of the sacred salamoia muries used for the savouring of the mola salsa, a salted flour mixture to be sprinkled on sacrificial victims (hence the Latin verb immolare, &quot; to put on the mola, to sacrifice &quot; ). This dough too was prepared by them on fixed days. Theirs also the task of preparing the suffimen for the Parilia. [ Vestalia ] Vesta was celebrated at the Vestalia which took place from June 7 to June 15. On the first day of the festivities the penus Vestae (the curtained sanctum sanctorum of her temple ) was opened, for the only time during the year, for women to offer sacrifices in. Such sacrifices included the removal of an unborn calf from a pregnant cow. [ Household worship ] Vesta is the goddess of the hearth at the centre of atrium and home. It was in the house and home that Vesta was most important because she was the goddess of the hearth and of fire. Vesta is particularly important to women of the household as the hearth was the place where food was prepared and next to it the meal was eaten with offerings being thrown into the fire to seek the future from the way it burned. The degree of the importance of Vesta and the hearth in Roman times carries on into modern English, where the word focus (Latin for hearth) continues to be used in a variety of ways, both scientifically and metaphorically, that although differing from the original meaning, still carry a sense of focussing or concentration on something of importance. [ Vesta Egg ] The Vesta Egg is is an old traditional jewellery box, derived from Vesta (godess of hearth, home and family). The jewellery box was used to keep precious jewellery in a safe place and symbolised protection of the jewellery and protection for the person wearing the jewellery. { Numa-Denis Fustel de Coulange La cité antique 1864. }.The egg decorated in jewels was most commonly used for holding wedding rings and similar to the modern faberge egg [ Notes ] Category:Roman goddesses Category:Fire goddesses Category:Virgin goddesses Category:Dii Familiaris af:Vesta ar:فستا bs:Vesta (mitologija) br:Vesta bg:Веста ca:Vesta (mitologia) cs:Vesta (mytologie) da:Vesta de:Vesta et:Vesta el:Βέστα es:Vesta (mitología) eo:Vesta eu:Vesta fa:وستا (اساطیر) fr:Vesta gl:Vesta (deusa) ia:Vesta it:Vesta he:וסטה ka:ვესტა (მითოლოგია) la:Vesta lt:Vesta hu:Vesta mk:Веста (божица) mr:व्हेस्टा nl:Vesta (mythologie) ja:ウェスタ no:Vesta (gudinne) pl:Westa pt:Vesta ro:Vesta ru:Веста simple:Vesta (mythology) sl:Vesta sr:Веста sh:Vesta (mitologija) fi:Vesta sv:Vesta chr:ᏪᏍᏔ (ᎤᏁᎳᏅᎯ) tr:Vesta (mitoloji) uk:Веста war:Vesta (mitolohiya) zh:維斯塔