{ Ducarius decapitates Flaminius at the Battle of Lake Trasimene, by } { Joseph-Noël Sylvestre. Béziers (Languedoc-Roussillon), Musée des beaux-Arts. } Gaius Flaminius Nepos was a politician and consul of the Roman Republic in the 3rd century BC. He was the greatest popular leader to challenge the authority of the Senate before the Gracchi a century later. In the aftermath of the First Punic War, Flaminius, a novus homo, was the leader of a reform movement which sought to reorganize state land in Italy. As tribune of the plebs in 232 BC, he passed a plebiscite which divided the land south of Ariminum, which had been conquered from the Gauls decades before, and gave it to poor families whose farms had fallen into ruin during the war. The Senate was opposed to this and he did not consult them, contrary to the constitution and tradition. Flaminius was governor of Sicily in 227. Meanwhile, the reorganization of the land contributed to a renewed attack on Roman territory by the Gauls, whom the Romans finally defeated at the Battle of Telamon in 224. In 223 Flaminius was elected consul for the first time, and with Publius Furius Philus he forced the Gauls to submit to Rome, creating the province of Cisalpine Gaul. In 221 Flaminius was magister equitum to Marcus Minucius Rufus, then in 220 chosen as censor along with Lucius Aemilius Papus. During his term he arranged for the Via Flaminia to be built from Rome to Ariminum, established colonies at Cremona and Placentia, reorganized the Centuriate Assembly to give the poorer classes more voting power, and built the Circus Flaminius on the Campus Martius. In 218, while serving in the Senate, he was the only senator to support the Lex Claudia, which prohibited senators from participating in overseas trade. In 217, during the Second Punic War and the invasion of Italy by Hannibal, he was re-elected consul with Gnaeus Servilius Geminus, in what was considered a rebuke of the Senate&apos;s prosecution of the war. Flaminius failed to take the appropriate rituals to become consul and was under threat of recall by the Senate. Flaminius raised four new legions and marched north to meet Hannibal, but was ambushed at Lake Trasimene. The army was destroyed and Flaminius was killed in 27 April 217 B.C. His supporters in the Senate began to lose power to the more aristocratic factions, and the Romans feared Hannibal would besiege their city. The Senate appointed as dictator Fabius Maximus. [ References ] Karel Jacobs, Gaius Flaminius, Edecea, Hoorn 1937, dissertation (in Dutch) [ Consul of the Roman Republic Titus Manlius Torquatus and Quintus Fulvius Flaccus Gnaeus Cornelius Scipio Calvus and Marcus Claudius Marcellus with Publius Furius Sp.f. Philus 223 BC ] [ Consul of the Roman Republic Publius Cornelius Scipio and Tiberius Sempronius Longus Gnaeus Servilius Geminus and Marcus Atilius Regulus (Suffect) with Gnaeus Servilius Geminus 217 BC ] [ Flaminius Nepos, Gaius ] Category:3rd-century BC births Category:217 BC deaths Nepos, Gaius Category:Ancient Roman generals Category:Roman generals killed in action Category:Roman consuls dying in year of consulship Category:Ancient Roman Masters of the Horse Category:Roman Republican consuls Category:Roman censors Category:Second Punic War commanders Category:3rd-century BC Romans ar:جايوس فلامينيوس نيبوس bg:Гай Фламиний ca:Gai Flamini (cònsol 223 i 217 aC) de:Gaius Flaminius el:Γάιος Φλαμίνιος Νέπος es:Cayo Flaminio Nepote fr:Caius Flaminius Nepos ko:가이우스 플라미니우스 it:Gaio Flaminio Nepote he:גאיוס פלאמיניוס nl:Gaius Flaminius Nepos ja:ガイウス・フラミニウス no:Gaius Flaminius pl:Flaminiusz pt:Caio Flamínio ru:Гай Фламиний sh:Gaj Flaminije fi:Gaius Flaminius uk:Гай Фламіній