[ Three-spined stickleback Gasterosteus aculeatus.jpg 250px LC IUCN3.1 Animal ia Chordata Actinopterygii Gasterosteiformes Gasterosteidae Gasterosteus G. aculeatus Gasterosteus aculeatus Linnaeus, 1758 * Gasteracanthus cataphractusPallas, 1814 * Gasterosteus aculeatus algeriensisSauvage, 1874 * Gasterosteus aculeatus messinicusStephanidis, 1971 * Gasterosteus aculeatus microcephalus(non Girard, 1854) * Gasterosteus algeriensisSauvage, 1874 * Gasterosteus argentatissimusBlanchard, 1866 * Gasterosteus argyropomusCuvier, 1829 * Gasterosteus atkinsiBean, 1879 * Gasterosteus atkinsiiBean, 1879 * Gasterosteus bailloniBlanchard, 1866 * Gasterosteus biaculeatusMitchill, 1815 * Gasterosteus biarmatusKrynicki, 1840 * Gasterosteus bispinosusWalbaum, 1792 * Gasterosteus brachycentrusCuvier, 1829 * Gasterosteus cataphractus(Pallas, 1814) * Gasterosteus cuvieriGirard, 1850 * Gasterosteus DekayiAyres, 1855 * Gasterosteus dimidiatusReinhardt, 1837 * Gasterosteus elegansBlanchard, 1866 * Gasterosteus gymnurus(non Cuvier, 1829) * Gasterosteus hologymnusRegan, 1909 * Gasterosteus inopinatusGirard, 1854 * Gasterosteus insculptusRichardson, 1855 * Gasterosteus intermediusGirard, 1856 * Gasterosteus islandicus(non Sauvage, 1874) * Gasterosteus leiurusCuvier, 1829 * Gasterosteus loricatusReinhardt, 1837 * Gasterosteus microcephalus(non Girard, 1854) * Gasterosteus nemausensisCrespon, 1844 * Gasterosteus neoboracensisDeKay, 1842 * Gasterosteus neustrianusBlanchard, 1866 * Gasterosteus nigerCuvier, 1829 * Gasterosteus noveboracensisCuvier, 1829 * Gasterosteus obolariusCuvier, 1829 * Gasterosteus plebeiusGirard, 1854 * Gasterosteus ponticusNordmann, 1840 * Gasterosteus pugettiGirard, 1856 * Gasterosteus quadrispinosaCrespon, 1844 * Gasterosteus quadrispinosusCrespon, 1844 * Gasterosteus semiarmatusCuvier, 1829 * Gasterosteus semiloricatusCuvier, 1829 * Gasterosteus serratusAyres, 1855 * Gasterosteus spinulosusYarrell, 1835 * Gasterosteus suppositusSauvage, 1874 * Gasterosteus teraculeatusLacepède, 1801 * Gasterosteus tetracanthusCuvier, 1829 * Gasterosteus texanusSauvage, 1874 * Gasterosteus trachurusCuvier, 1829 * Gastrosteus hologymnusRegan, 1909 ] The three-spined stickleback, Gasterosteus aculeatus, [ Gasterosteus aculeatus February 2006 ] is a fish native to much of northern Europe, northern Asia and North America. It has been introduced into parts of southern and central Europe. [ Distribution and morphological variation ] Three subspecies are currently recognized by the IUCN : Gasterosteus aculeatus aculeatus is found in most of the species range, and is the subspecies most strictly termed the three-spined stickleback; its common name in Britain is the tiddler, although &quot; tittlebat &quot; is also sometimes used. G. a. williamsoni, the unarmored threespine stickleback, is found only in North America; its recognised range is southern California, though there are isolated reports of it occurring in British Columbia and Mexico; G. a. santaeannae, the Santa Ana stickleback, is also restricted to North America. These subspecies actually represent three examples from the enormous range of morphological variation present within three-spined sticklebacks. These fall into two rough categories, the anadromous and the freshwater forms. The anadramous form spends most of its adult life eating plankton and fish in the sea, and returns to freshwater to breed. The adult fish are typically between 6 and 10  cm long, and have 30 to 40 lateral armour plates along their sides. They also have long dorsal and pelvic spines. The anadromous form is morphologically similar all around the Northern Hemisphere, such that anadromous fish from the Baltic, the Atlantic and the Pacific all resemble each other quite closely. Three-spined stickleback populations are also found in freshwater lakes and streams. These populations were probably formed when anadromous fish started spending their entire life cycle in freshwater, and thus evolved to live there all year round. Freshwater populations are extremely morphologically diverse, to the extent that many observers (and some taxonomists) would describe a new subspecies of three-spined stickleback in almost every lake in the Northern Hemisphere. One consistent difference between freshwater populations and their anadromous ancestors is the amount of body armour, as the majority of freshwater fish only have between 0 and 12 lateral armour plates, and shorter dorsal and pelvic spines. However, there are also large morphological differences between lakes. One major axis of variation is between populations found in deep, steep sided lakes and those in small, shallow lakes. The fish in the deep lakes typically feed in the surface waters on plankton, and often have large eyes, with short, slim bodies and an upturned jaw. Some researchers refer to this as the &apos;&apos;limnetic&apos;&apos; form. Fish from shallow lakes feed mainly on the lake bed, and are often long and heavy bodied with a relatively horizontal jaw and a small eye. These populations are referred to as the &apos;&apos;benthic&apos;&apos; form. Since each watershed was probably colonised separately by anadromous sticklebacks, it is widely believed that morphologically similar populations in different watersheds or on different continents evolved independently. There is a unique population in the meromictic Pink Lake in Gatineau Park, Quebec. One fascinating aspect of this morphological variation is that a number of lakes contain both a limnetic and a benthic type, and these do not interbreed with each other. Evolutionary biologists often define species as populations that do not interbreed with each other (the Biological Species Concept ), and thus the benthics and limnetics within each lake would constitute separate species. These species pairs are an excellent example of how adaptation to different environments (in this case feeding in the surface waters or on the lake bed) can generate new species. This process has come to be termed speciation. This type of species pairs is found in British Columbia in Western Canada. The lakes themselves only contain three-spined sticklebacks and cutthroat trout, and all are on islands. Tragically, the pair in Hadley Lake on Lasqueti Island was destroyed in the mid 1980s by the introduction of a predatory catfish, and the pair in Enos Lake on Vancouver Island has started to interbreed and are no longer two distinct species. { Behm, J. E., A. R. Ives and J. W. Boughman. 2010. &quot; Breakdown in postmating isolation and the collapse of a species pair through hybridization &quot; American Naturalist 175:11–26. } The two remaining pairs are on Texada Island, in Paxton Lake and Priest Lake, and they are listed as Endangered in the Canadian Species At Risk Act. { Canada - Species At Risk Act } Other species pairs which consist of a well-armored marine form and a smaller, unarmored fresh water form are being studied in ponds and lakes in Southcentral Alaska that were once marine habitats such as those uplifted during the 1964 Alaska earthquake. The evolutionary dynamics of these species pairs are providing a model for the processes of speciation which has taken place in less than 20 years in at least one lake. In 1982, a chemical eradication program intended to make room for trout and salmon at Loberg Lake, Alaska killed the resident freshwater populations of sticklebacks. Oceanic sticklebacks introduced through nearby Cook Inlet recolonized the lake. In just 12 years beginning in 1990, the frequency of the oceanic form dropped steadily, from 100% to 11%, while a variety with fewer plates increased to 75% of the population, with various intermediate forms making up another small fraction. [ Carroll Sean B. Sean B. Carroll The Making of the Fittest: DNA and the Ultimate Forensic Record of Evolution W.W. Norton &amp; Co. 2006 56–57 978-0-393-06163-5 ] This rapid evolution is thought to be possible through genetic variations that confer competitive advantages for survival in freshwater when conditions shift rapidly from salt to freshwater. However, the actual molecular basis of this evolution still remains unknown. Although sticklebacks are found in many locations around the coasts of the Northern Hemisphere and are thus viewed by the IUCN as species of least concern, the unique evolutionary history encapsulated in many freshwater populations indicates that further legal protection may be warranted. The IUCN indicates that this evaluation may be out of date. [ World Conservation Monitoring Centre 1996 8951 Gasterosteus aculeatus 12 May 2006 ] [ Life history ] Male stickleback with red throat and shiny blue eye Many populations take 2 years to mature and experience only one breeding season before dying and some can take up to 3 years to reach maturity. However, some freshwater populations and populations at extreme latitudes can reach maturity in only 1 year. In spring, males defend territories where they build nests on the bottom of the pond or other body of water; the sequence of territorial, courtship and mating behaviours was described in detail by Niko Tinbergen in a landmark early study in ethology. Territorial males develop a red chin and belly colouration, and Tinbergen showed that the red colour acted as a simple sign stimulus, releasing aggression in other males and the first steps in the courtship sequence from gravid females. Red colouration is produced from carotenoids found in the diet of the fish. As carotenoids cannot be synthesised de novo, the degree of colouration gives an indication of male quality, with higher quality males showing more intense colouration. However, it is noteworthy that the response to red is not universal across the entire species complex, with black throated populations often found in peat-stained waters. Males also develop blue irises on maturation. Only the males care for the eggs once they are fertilised. Parental care is intense, involving nest maintenance and fanning of the eggs to ensure a fresh water supply, even at night. Males build the nests from vegetation, sand, pebbles and other debris, adhering the material together with spiggin, a proteinaceous glue-like substance secreted from the kidneys. Sticklebacks have four colour photoreceptor cell s in their retina, making them potentially tetrachromatic. They are capable of perceiving ultraviolet wavelengths of light invisible to the human eye and use such wavelengths in their normal behavioural repertoire. The three-spined stickleback is a known intermediate host for the hermaphroditic parasite Schistocephalus solidus, a tapeworm of fish and fish-eating birds. { LoBue, C. P. and M. A. Bell. 1993. &quot; Phenotypic manipulation by the cestode parasite &apos;&apos;Schistocephalus solidus&apos;&apos; of its intermediate host, &apos;&apos;Gasterosteus aculeatus&apos;&apos;, the threespine stickleback &quot; American Naturalist 142:725–735. } [ Genetics ] Three-spined sticklebacks have recently become a major research organism for evolutionary biologists trying to understand the genetic changes involved in adapting to new environments. The entire genome of a female fish from Bear Paw Lake in Alaska was recently sequenced by the Broad Institute and many other genetic resources are available. [ Stickleback Genome at ENSEMBL http://www.ensembl.org/Gasterosteus_aculeatus/Info/Index ] This population is under risk from the presence of introduced northern pike in a nearby lake. [ In popular culture ] The three-spined stickledback is also known as a tittlebat, and was featured in The Pickwick Papers by Charles Dickens. Samuel Pickwick is said to have published a treatise on the subject of tittlebats, specifically the ones living in the ponds of Hampstead. [ References ] [ 2 ] [ External links ] [ 166365 Gasterosteus aculeatus 19 March 2006 ] The section of the Canadian Species at Risk Act dealing with the species pairs The Stickleback Genome in Ensembl Category:Gasterosteus Category:Fish of North America Category:Fish of the United States Category:Fish of Mexico Category:Fish of Asia Category:Fish of Russia Category:Fish of Europe Category:Fish of Ukraine Category:Fish of Germany Category:Fish of the Atlantic Ocean Category:Arctic freshwater fish Category:Fish of the North Sea Category:Fish of the Black Sea Category:Fish of the Baltic Sea als:Dreistachliger Stichling be:Колюшка трохіголкавая be-x-old:Колюшка трохіголкавая bg:Триигла бодливка ca:Jonqueter cs:Koljuška tříostná da:Trepigget hundestejle de:Dreistachliger Stichling et:Ogalik es:Gasterosteus aculeatus eu:Arrain hiruarantza fo:Kombikk fr:Gasterosteus aculeatus ko:큰가시고기 is:Hornsíli it:Gasterosteus aculeatus csb:Òstrzëca lv:Kazrags lt:Trispyglė dyglė hu:Tüskés pikó nl:Driedoornige stekelbaars ja:イトヨ no:Trepigget stingsild nn:Trepigga stingsild pl:Ciernik pt:Esgana-gata ru:Трёхиглая колюшка se:Gulmmet stq:Stiekelboars sr:Gasterosteus aculeatus fi:Kolmipiikki sv:Storspigg uk:Колючка триголкова wa:Spinoke zh:三刺鱼