[ October 2009 ] Timothy Murphy (1751–1818) was a sniper in the American Revolutionary War. At the Battle of Bemis Heights (Second Battle of Saratoga) on October 7, 1777, Murphy is reputed to have shot and killed Sir Francis Clerke and General Simon Fraser. Murphy&apos;s life is the subject of John Brick&apos;s 1953 novel, The Rifleman. [ Early life ] Relatively few details of Murphy&apos;s early life are known. He was born in 1751 near the Delaware Water Gap. His parents were immigrants from County Donegal, Ireland, and moved to Shamokin Flats (now Sunbury, Pennsylvania ) in 1759, when Murphy was eight years old. A few years later, Murphy became an apprentice to a Mr. van Campen, and moved with the van Campen family to the Wyoming Valley, which was then the frontier. [ http://www.dmna.state.ny.us/historic/articles/murphy.htm Timothy Murphy: Frontier Rifleman New York State Military Museum and Veterans Research Center 2008-02-12 ] [ Revolutionary War ] On June 29, 1775, shortly after the start of the American Revolutionary War, Timothy Murphy and his brother John enlisted in the Northumberland County Riflemen, specifically Captain John Lowdon&apos;s Company. Their unit saw action in the Siege of Boston, the Battle of Long Island, and &quot; skirmishing in Westchester &quot;. After this, Murphy was promoted to the rank of sergeant in the Continental Army &apos;s 12th Pennsylvania Regiment and fought at the battles of Trenton and Princeton. Murphy was an &quot; expert marksman &quot;, defined as being &quot; able to hit a seven inch target at 250 yards &quot;. In July 1777 this skill led to Murphy joining Daniel Morgan &apos;s newly formed &quot; Sharpshooter Corps &quot;. Later that year, he was selected as one of 500 handpicked riflemen to go with General Daniel Morgan to Upstate New York to help stop General John Burgoyne and the British Army. As the battles around Saratoga raged, the British, having been pushed back, were being rallied by Brigadier General Simon Fraser. Benedict Arnold rode up to General Morgan, pointed at Fraser and told Morgan the man was worth a regiment. Morgan called on Murphy and said: &quot; That gallant officer is General Fraser. I admire him, but it is necessary that he should die, do your duty. &quot; Murphy climbed a nearby tree, took careful aim at the extreme distance of 300 yards, and fired four times. The first shot was a close miss, the second grazed the General&apos;s horse, and with the third, Fraser tumbled from his horse, shot through the stomach. General Fraser died that night. British Senior officer Sir Francis Clerke, General Burgoyne&apos;s chief aide-de-camp, galloped onto the field with a message. Murphy&apos;s fourth shot killed him instantly. Murphy also fought at the battle of the Middle Fort in 1780. [ Personal life ] It was during this period the Murphy also became the terror of one of the more prosperous Dutch farmers of the valley, Johannes Feeck. Murphy took to scouting more frequently in the direction of his farm, and at first was highly welcome. However, when the farmer and his wife realized that the real reason was a growing attraction between the Irishman and their daughter Margaret (Peggy), Murphy was told not to return. Undeterred, Murphy secured leave from his sympathetic commander, and eloped with Peggy to Duanesburgh to be married by the nearest available Dominie. Peggy&apos;s father became reconciled to the marriage when Murphy let it be known he would otherwise take his new bride to Pennsylvania. [ October 2009 ] Shortly thereafter, when the British raided the Schoharie Valley, and Murphy&apos;s fame among his neighbors reached its zenith at the defense of the Middle Fort, Peggy was with him, molding bullets, loading muskets, and swearing to take up a spear when the ammunition ran out. [ October 2009 ] Early in 1781, Murphy reenlisted in the Pennsylvania Line under General Wayne and was present for the final Battle of Yorktown. He returned to the Schoharie at the war&apos;s end. [ Children ] By his first wife, Murphy had five sons and four daughters. Several years after the death of his first wife in 1807, Murphy married Mary Robertson, and with her relocated to Charlotteville, New York and there by her had four more sons. [ Miscellaneous ] Murphy never learned to read or write, nor applied for a veteran&apos;s grant or pension, but nonetheless was able to acquire a number of farms and a grist mill, and become a local political power. Later, he returned to Fultonham, where he died in 1818 of cancer. [ Interment ] Murphy was buried there next to his first wife. In 1872, he was reinterred at Upper Middleburgh Cemetery at Middleburgh, New York. Although the State Legislature voted to erect a monument to Murphy in 1819, none was built until some of his descendants purchased one to be placed in the cemetery in 1910. The bronze bas-relief plaque was designed by noted sculptress Evelyn Beatrice Longman (1874–1954). [ http://www.oprhp.state.ny.us/hpimaging/hp_view.asp?GroupView%3D11554 National Register of Historic Places Registration: Upper Middleburgh Cemetery June 2003 2010-02-20 Raymond W. Smith New York State Office of Parks, Recreation and Historic Preservation ] In 1913 a marker was placed commemorating Murphy at the Saratoga Battlefield, and the state put up its own marker there in 1929. In dedicating that monument, Governor Franklin D. Roosevelt said: This country has been made by Timothy Murphys, the men in the ranks. Conditions here called for the qualities of the heart and head that Tim Murphy had in abundance. Our histories should tell us more of the men in the ranks, for it was to them, more than to the generals, that we were indebted for our military victories. { Text from the New York State Military Museum incorporated in this article } [ Legacy ] The Timothy Murphy Memorial Monument in Middleburgh, New York Murphy is considered a hero in Schoharie County, New York where he resided. In the cemetery there, an annual walk is named in his honor. [ References ] Category:1751 births Category:1818 deaths Category:Cancer deaths in New York Category:Continental Army soldiers Category:American people of Irish descent Category:Military snipers Category:People from Schoharie County, New York Category:People from Northumberland County, Pennsylvania Category:Date of birth missing Category:Date of death missing