[ the radio network that existed until 1953 RHC-Cadena Azul ] { Radio network } { International } { Government of Cuba } { Luis López López(General Director), Pedro Otero Cabañas(Chief Editor) } { 1 May 1961 } { http://www.rhc.cu/ } Radio Havana Cuba ( [ Radio Habana Cuba ], RHC) is the official government-run international broadcasting station of Cuba. It can be heard in many parts of the world including the United States on shortwave at 6000  kHz and other frequencies. Radio Havana, along with Radio Rebelde, Cubavision Television and other Cuban Radio and Television broadcasts to Europe, North America, Central and South America via free-to-air satellite from the Hispanisat satellite over the Atlantic Ocean. { HORARIOS, BANDAS Y FRECUENCIAS } [ Early history (1960s–1980s) ] Although RHC was officially inaugurated in May 1961, the idea of an international Cuban radio station was born in the Sierra Maestra mountains during the final stage of the fight against Fulgencio Batista. After the creation of Radio Rebelde by Ernesto &apos;Che&apos; Guevara in February, 1958, the leadership of the guerrilla movement began to analyze the possibility of creating a radio station after achieving final victory. This station would be able to communicate news about the Cuban Revolution to countries around the world. During the Cold War, RHC relayed propaganda broadcasts from North Vietnam and North Korea, and the USSR, as well as its original programming. The North Vietnamese programming from the Voice of Vietnam was received by teletype and read by Radio Havana Cuba announcers. In the 1960s, Radio Havana Cuba broadcast Radio Free Dixie aimed at African-American s struggling against segregation and Jim Crow in the southern United States. At times in the 1980s, in order to protest the Reagan administration &apos;s Cuba policy and its instigation of the anti- Castro Radio Martí program from the Voice of America, Radio Habana Cuba broadcast briefly on mediumwave frequencies at a greatly boosted power allowing the station to be heard on American AM radios and overwhelming local American AM stations broadcasting on that frequency, including clear channel station WHO in Des Moines, Iowa on 1040 kHz. RHC no longer transmits on medium waves (see schedule at RHC&apos;s Web site), even though Radio Martí still transmits from the United States to Cuba on 1180  kHz. [ Current broadcasting ] Located on Havana &apos;s Avenida Infanta, the offices of Radio Havana Cuba share a facility with two other renowned national stations that have contributed greatly to the history of Cuban radio broadcasting: Radio Progreso and CMBF, Radio Musical Nacional. Currently, RHC broadcasts in nine languages: Spanish, English, French, Portuguese, Arabic, Quechua, Guarani, Creole and Esperanto, 24 hours a day, with a varied programming that includes news, music and features. RHC&apos;s English-language broadcasts are heavily centered on the U.S.A and feature news items that uniformly adversely reflect upon the U.S. government and the current administration, especially its foreign policies. In 2004, RHC and related mediumwave transmitters, such as Radio Rebelde, broadcast speeches by Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez as well as Castro. RHC was off the air temporarily in late August 2004 due to damage caused by Hurricane Charley. The station broadcasts Cuban popular music frequently, as well as radio hobbyist tips from announcer Arnie Coro. Another popular announcer was Keith Perron in the early 1990s who went on to work for China Radio International and is now host of the Taiwan based Happy Station show. The shortwave numbers station nicknamed &quot; Atencion &quot; by independent shortwave listeners has been linked to RHC radio transmissions equipment. In numbers station transmissions, a series of seemingly meaningless numbers are read out over the air, either in English or Spanish. These audible transmission of numbers are believed to be one-time coded messages to espionage agents residing in the targeted country. Numbers station monitors have noted that on occasion RHC interval signals have been heard at the beginning or end of intelligence-related transmissions. The United States Government convicted the Cuban Five with evidence that was intercepted and decoded from Atencion. [ Interval signal ] The station&apos;s interval signal is La Marcha del 26 de Julio (The 26th of July March), written by Agustín Díaz Cartaya. Sometime during the interval, Thelma Rodriguez gives out the radio identifier details in the Spanish and English languages. &quot; This is/You&apos;re listening to Radio Habana Cuba, broadcasting live from Havana, Cuba in the free territory of the Americas &quot; (Spanish: &quot; Esta es Radio Havana Cuba transmitiendo desde Cuba, territorio libre en America &quot; ). [ RHC output (1950–1996) ] For a comparison of RHC to other broadcasters see [ References ] [ External links ] Radio Habana Cuba online Unofficial Website with recordings and (outdated) schedules CMBF Web site Radio Ciudad de La Habana Directorio de la Radio Cubana Directorio de Radio Cubana en Internet Audio of interval signal [ Cuba ] Category:External services (broadcasting) Category:Radio stations in Cuba Category:Radio stations established in 1961 de:Radio Habana Cuba es:Radio Habana Cuba eo:Radio Havano Kubo it:Radio Habana Cuba ja:ラジオ・ハバナ・キューバ