[ December 2010 ] [ 15 Golden Raspberry Awards March 26, 1995 El Rey Hotel, Los Angeles, California Color of Night The Specialist (2), Wyatt Earp (2), The Flintstones (2), and Naked Gun 33⅓: The Final Insult (2) Color of Night (9) 14th 16th ] The 15th Golden Raspberry Award s were held on March 26, 1995 at the El Rey Hotel in Los Angeles, California, to recognize the worst the movie industry had to offer in 1994. Erotic thriller Color of Night became the only Golden Raspberry Worst Picture &quot; winner &quot; to not receive a single other Razzie (out of eight other nominations). Thumbelina became the first animated film to be nominated for and win a Razzie, which it received for Worst Original Song. The Specialist, Wyatt Earp, The Flintstones and Naked Gun 33⅓: The Final Insult each took home two awards, even though the latter two weren&apos;t nominated for Worst Picture. The list of nominees follows, with recipients denoted in bold. [ Awards and nominations ] [ #B0C4DE Winner(in bold) ] Category Recipient Worst Picture Color of Night ( Hollywood Pictures ) North ( Columbia ) On Deadly Ground ( Warner Bros. ) The Specialist (Warner Bros.) Wyatt Earp (Warner Bros.) Worst Actor Kevin Costner in Wyatt Earp as Wyatt Earp Macaulay Culkin in Getting Even with Dad, The Pagemaster and Richie Rich Steven Seagal in On Deadly Ground Sylvester Stallone in The Specialist Bruce Willis in Color of Night and North Worst Actress Sharon Stone in Intersection and The Specialist as Sally Eastman and May Munro Kim Basinger in The Getaway Joan Chen in On Deadly Ground Jane March in Color of Night Uma Thurman in Even Cowgirls Get the Blues Worst Supporting Actor O. J. Simpson in Naked Gun 33⅓: The Final Insult (Simpson was on trial for murder at the time of his &quot; win &quot;.) as Detective Nordberg Dan Aykroyd in Exit to Eden and North Jane March (as Richie) in Color of Night William Shatner in Star Trek Generations Rod Steiger in The Specialist Worst Supporting Actress Rosie O&apos;Donnell in Car 54, Where Are You?, Exit to Eden and The Flintstones as Lucille Toody, Shelia Kingston and Betty Rubble Kathy Bates in North Elizabeth Taylor in The Flintstones Lesley Ann Warren in Color of Night Sean Young in Even Cowgirls Get the Blues Worst Screen Couple Sylvester Stallone and Sharon Stone in The Specialist (tie) Tom Cruise and Brad Pitt in Interview with the Vampire (tie) Dan Aykroyd and Rosie O&apos;Donnell in Exit to Eden Kevin Costner and &quot; any of his three wives &quot; ( Annabeth Gish, Joanna Going, and Mare Winningham ) in Wyatt Earp Any combination of any two people from the same cast in Color of Night Worst Director Steven Seagal for On Deadly Ground Lawrence Kasdan for Wyatt Earp John Landis for Beverly Hills Cop III Rob Reiner for North Richard Rush for Color of Night Worst Screenplay The Flintstones, written by Tom S. Parker, Babaloo Mandel, Mitch Markowitz, Dava Savel, Brian Levant, Michael G. Wilson, Al Aidekman, Cindy Begel, Lloyd Garver, David Silverman, Stephen Sustarsic, Nancy Steen, Neil Thompson, Daniel Goldin, Joshua Goldin, Peter Martin Wortmann, Robert Conte, Jeff Reno, Ron Osborn, Bruce Cohen, Jason Hoffs, Kate Barker, Gary Ross, Rob Dames, Leonard Ripps, Fred Fox, Jr., Lon Diamond, David Richardson, Roy Teicher, Richard Gurman, Michael J. Di Gaetano, and Ruth Bennett (Although Jim Jennewein and Steven E. de Souza were both credited as primary screenwriters, first-billed writer Tom S. Parker was the only &quot; winner &quot; credited in the film; the other 31 recipients all wrote drafts of the screenplay.) Color of Night, screenplay by Matthew Chapman and Billy Ray, story by Ray Milk Money, written by John Mattson North, screenplay by Alan Zweibel and Andrew Sheinman, from the novel by Zweibel On Deadly Ground, written by Ed Horowitz &amp; Rubin Russin Worst New Star Anna Nicole Smith in Naked Gun 33⅓: The Final Insult as Tanya Peters Jim Carrey in Ace Ventura: Pet Detective, Dumb and Dumber and The Mask Chris Elliott in Cabin Boy Chris Isaak in Little Buddha Shaquille O&apos;Neal in Blue Chips Worst Original Song &quot; Marry the Mole! &quot; from Thumbelina, music by Barry Manilow, lyrics by Jack Feldman &quot; The Color of the Night &quot; from Color of Night, music and lyrics by Jud J. Friedman, Lauren Christy and Dominic Frontiere &quot; Under the Same Sun &quot; from On Deadly Ground, written by Mark Hudson, Klaus Meine and Scott Fairbairn Worst Remake or Sequel Wyatt Earp ( Warner Bros. ) Beverly Hills Cop III ( Paramount ) City Slickers II ( Columbia ) The Flintstones ( Universal ) Love Affair (Warner Bros.) [ See also ] [ Film ] 1994 in film 67th Academy Awards 48th British Academy Film Awards 52nd Golden Globe Awards 1st Screen Actors Guild Awards [ References ] [ Razzie Awards Internet Movie Database 1995 http://www.imdb.com/Sections/Awards/Razzie_Awards/1995 ] Golden Raspberry Awards Category:Golden Raspberry Awards ceremonies de:Goldene Himbeere 1995 es:Anexo:Premios Golden Raspberry 1994 fr:15e cérémonie des Razzie Awards nl:Golden Raspberry Awards 1994 ja:第15回ゴールデンラズベリー賞 no:Den 15. Razzie-utdelingen pl:15. rozdanie nagród Złotych Malin