This article refers to the canonization process for Joan of Arc, and to her as a Catholic saint. For her as an historical figure, see Joan of Arc [ St. Joan of Arc statue at the Notre Dame Cathedral, where she was beatified. ] Saint Joan of Arc center Born Possibly 6 January 1412, The 6 January claim is based on a single source: a letter from Lord Perceval de Boullainvilliers on 21 July 1429 (see Pernoud&apos;s Joan of Arc By Herself and Her Witnesses, p. 98.) Joan could only estimate her own age, and the rehabilitation trial witnesses likewise estimated her age even though several of these people were her godmothers and godfathers. The event was probably not recorded. Domrémy (later renamed Domrémy-la-Pucelle), France Died 30 May 1431, Rouen, France Canonized by Roman Catholic Church Beatified April 18, 1909 by Pope Pius X Canonized May 16, 1920 by Pope Benedict XV Feast-day May 30 Patronage captives; France; martyrs; opponents of Church authorities; people ridiculed for their piety; prisoners; rape victims; soldiers; Women Appointed for Voluntary Emergency Service; Women&apos;s Army Corps In the face of your enemies, in the face of harassment, ridicule, and doubt, you held firm in your faith. Even in your abandonment, alone and without friends, you held firm in your faith. Even as you faced your own mortality, you held firm in your faith. I pray that I may be as bold in my beliefs as you, St. Joan. I ask that you ride alongside me in my own battles. Help me be mindful that what is worthwhile can be won when I persist. Help me hold firm in my faith. Help me believe in my ability to act well and wisely. Amen. Prayer to Joan of Arc for Faith Saint Joan of Arc, The Maid of Orleans (Jeanne d&apos;Arc) is a recognized Saint of the Roman Catholic Church. Although she was excommunicated and burned at the stake by local officials in 1431, central church officials would later nullify her excommunication, declaring her a martyr unjustly executed for a secular vendetta. Her legend would grow from there, leading to her beatification in 1909 and her canonization in 1920. [ Course to sainthood ] [ Death and 15th century ] As with other saints who were excommunicated or investigated by ecclesiastic courts, such as St. Athanasius, St. Theresa of Avila and St. John of the Cross, Joan of Arc was put on trial by an Inquisitorial court. In Joan&apos;s case, the court was controlled by the English government in occupied northern France, leading to her burning at the stake at Rouen. When the French regained Rouen in 1449, a series of investigations were launched which led to a formal appeal run by the Inquisitor-General in 1455. She was declared innocent on July 7, 1456. The Inquisitor&apos;s summary of evidence for the case describes her as a martyr who had been executed by a court which was itself in violation of the Church&apos;s rules. She had always been considered innocent by those of her own faction. The city of Orléans commemorated her death each year beginning in 1432, and from 1435 onward performed a religious play centered around her victories. The play represented her as a divinely sent saviour guided by angels. In 1452, during one of the postwar investigations into her execution, Cardinal d&apos;Estouteville declared that this religious play would merit qualification as a pilgrimage site by which attendees could gain an indulgence. Not long after the appeal, Pope Pius II wrote an approving piece about her in his memoirs. [ 16th century ] During the 16th century, Joan of Arc was utilized as a symbol of the Catholic League, a group organized to fight against Protestantism during the Wars of Religion of that era. [ 19th century to present ] Paradoxically, it was the publication of works by secular historians in the mid-19th century which seems to have sparked widespread public efforts to ask the Church to officially canonize her. Félix Dupanloup, Bishop of Orléans from 1849 to 1878, led the efforts which culminated in Joan of Arc&apos;s beatification in 1909, held in Notre Dame de Paris. During the subsequent fighting in France during World War I, Allied troops carried her image into battle with them. During one battle, French troops interpreted a German searchlight image projected onto low-lying clouds as an appearance by Joan, which greatly bolstered their morale. Her canonization came on 16 May 1920. Over 30,000 people attended the ceremony in Rome, including 140 descendants of Joan of Arc&apos;s family. Pope Benedict XV presided over the rite, for which the interior of St. Peter&apos;s Basilica was richly decorated (Associated Press, 16 May 1920). A commemorative medallion made in France at the time of Joan of Arc&apos;s beatification. Her beatification approximately coincided with the French invention of the Janvier transfer engraving machine (also called a die engraving pantograph) which facilitates the creation of minted coins and commemorative medallions. This invention, together with the already well-established French sculptural tradition, added another element to Saint Joan&apos;s beatification: a series of well-made religious art medals featuring Saint Jeanne d&apos;Arc with scenes from her life. [ Popularity ] { St. Joan of Arc Chapel at the Marquette University campus, a chapel moved from its original location in France. } Her feast day is 30 May. Although changes to the Church-wide calendar in 1968 moved many medieval European saints&apos; days off the general calendar in order to make room for more non-Europeans, her feast day is still celebrated on many local and regional Church calendars, especially in France. Many Catholic churches around the globe have been named after her in the decades since her canonization. She has become especially popular among Traditional Catholics, particularly in France - both because of her obvious connection to this country as well as the fact that the Traditional Catholic movement is strongest in France. This branch of Catholicism, which has refused to accept the changes made by the Second Vatican Council, has compared the 1988 excommunication of Archbishop Marcel Lefebvre (one of the founders of the Traditional Catholic movement) to Joan of Arc&apos;s excommunication by a corrupt pro-English Bishop in 1431. Traditional Catholic parishes sometimes perform plays in Joan of Arc&apos;s honor. [ Notes ] [ See also ] [ Saints ] Joan of Arc [ References ] [ Joan of Arc Made a Saint Associated Press 1920-05-16 ] [ External links ] Catholic Encyclopedia entry for St. Joan of Arc. Elias Bing metalworks Commemorative medallions created for St. Joan of Arc&apos;s beatification and canonization Médailles Jeanne d’Arc.French site containing pictures and descriptions of Medallions devoted to Joan of Arc. Category:Sainthood Category:Joan of Arc Category:1920 in religion