[ the decapitation device other uses Guillotine (disambiguation) ] [ May 2011 ] Historic replicas (1:6 scale) of the two main types of French guillotines: Model 1792, left, and Model 1872 (state as of 1907), right The guillotine ( [ ˈ ɡ ɪ l ə t iː n ] or [ ˈ ɡ iː. ə t iː n ]; [ ɡijɔtin lang ] ) is a device used for carrying out :execution s by decapitation. It consists of a tall upright frame from which an angled blade is suspended. This blade is raised with a rope, and the condemned then places his or her head beneath it. The blade then falls rapidly, severing the head from the body. The device is noted for long being the main method of execution in France and, more particularly, for its use during the French Revolution, when it &quot; became a part of popular culture, celebrated as the people&apos;s avenger by supporters of the Revolution and vilified as the pre-eminent symbol of the Reign of Terror by opponents. &quot; { R. Po-chia Hsia, Lynn Hunt, Thomas R. Martin, Barbara H. Rosenwein, and Bonnie G. Smith, The Making of the West, Peoples and Culture, A Concise History, Volume II: Since 1340, Second Edition (New York: Bedford/St. Martin&apos;s, 2007), 664. } In spite of being primarily associated with the French Revolution, the guillotine continued to be used long after the French Revolution in several countries, including France, where it was the sole method of execution until the abolition of capital punishment in 1981. { Loi n°81-908 du 9 octobre 1981 portant abolition de la peine de mort } [ French Revolution ] { Dr. Guillotin } { Robespierre } { Areski El Bachir a } { Kabyle criminal guillotined 14 May 1895 at the age of 28 } On 10 October 1789, Doctor Joseph-Ignace Guillotin, a French physician, stood before the National Assembly and proposed the following six articles in favour of the reformation of capital punishment : Article 1: All offences of the same kind will be punished by the same type of punishment irrespective of the rank of status of the guilty party. Article 2: Whenever the Law imposes the death penalty, irrespective of the nature of the offence, the punishment shall be the same: decapitation, effected by means of a simple mechanism. Article 3: The punishment of the guilty party shall not bring discredit upon or discrimination against his family. Article 4: No one shall reproach a citizen with any punishment imposed on one of his relatives. Such offenders shall be publicly reprimanded by a judge. Article 5: The condemned person&apos;s property shall not be confiscated. Article 6: At the request of the family, the corpse of the condemned man shall be returned to them for burial and no reference to the nature of death shall be registered. R. F. Opies, &quot; Guillotine &quot; (Gloucestershire: Sutton Publishing Ltd, 2003) p. 22 Sensing the growing discontent, Louis XVI banned the use of the breaking wheel. [ Executive Producer Don Cambou Modern Marvels: Death Devices A &amp; E Television Networks 2001 ] In 1791, as the French Revolution progressed, the National Assembly researched a new method to be used on all condemned people regardless of class. Their concerns contributed to the idea that capital punishment&apos;s purpose was simply the ending of life instead of the infliction of pain. A committee was formed under Antoine Louis, physician to the King and Secretary to the Academy of Surgery. Joseph-Ignace Guillotin, was also on the committee. The group was influenced by the Italian Mannaia (or Mannaja), the Scottish Maiden and the Halifax Gibbet. While these prior instruments usually crushed the neck or used blunt force to take off a head, devices also usually used a crescent blade and a lunette (a hinged two part yoke to immobilize the victim&apos;s neck). Laquiante, an officer of the Strasbourg criminal court, [ Croker John Wilson Essays on the early period of the French Revolution http://books.google.com/books?id%3DfQZoAAAAMAAJ%26amp%3Bpg%3DPA549 21 October 2010 1857 J. Murray 549 ] made a design for a beheading machine and employed Tobias Schmidt, a German engineer and harpsichord maker, to construct a prototype. { Edmond-Jean Guérin, &quot; 1738–1814 – Joseph-Ignace Guillotin : biographie historique d&apos;une figure saintaise &quot;, Histoire P@ssion website, accessed 2009-06-27, citing M. Georges de Labruyère in le Matin, 22 Aug. 1907 } Antoine Louis is also credited with the design of the prototype. An apocryphal story claims that King Louis XVI (an amateur locksmith) recommended a triangular blade with a beveled edge be used instead of a crescent blade, but it was Schmidt who suggested placing the blade at an oblique 45-degree angle and changing it from the curved blade. [ Joseph Ignace Guillotin whonamedit.com http://www.whonamedit.com/doctor.cfm/2275.html 9 March 2008 ] The first execution by guillotine was performed on highwayman Nicolas Jacques Pelletier [ http://www.crimemuseum.org/library/execution/guillotine.html Crime Library National Museum of Crime &amp; Punishment 13 June 2009 [I]n 1792, Nicholas-Jacques Pelletier became the first person to be put to death with a guillotine. ] on 25 April 1792. { &quot; Chase&apos;s Calendar of Events 2007 &quot;, p. 291 } { Scurr, pp. 222–223 } { Abbot, p. 144 } The basis for the machine&apos;s success was the belief that it was a humane form of execution, contrasting with the methods used in pre-revolutionary, Ancien Régime France. In France, before the guillotine, members of the nobility were beheaded with a sword or axe (which typically took at least two blows before killing the condemned), while commoners were usually hanged, a form of death that could take minutes or longer. Other more gruesome methods of executions were also used, such as the wheel or burning at the stake. In the case of decapitation, it also sometimes took repeated blows to sever the head completely, and it was also very likely for the condemned to slowly bleed to death before the head could be fully severed. The condemned or the family of the condemned would sometimes pay the executioner to ensure that the blade was sharp in order to provide for a quick and relatively painless death. The guillotine was thus perceived to deliver an immediate death without risk of suffocation. Furthermore, having only one method of civil execution was seen as an expression of equality among citizens. The guillotine was then the only civil legal execution method in France until the abolition of the death penalty in 1981, { Pre-1981 penal code, article 12 : &quot; Any person sentenced to death shall be beheaded. &quot; } apart from certain crimes against the security of the state, or for the death sentences passed by military courts, { Pre-1971 Code de Justice Militaire, article 336: &quot; Les justiciables des juridictions des forces armées condamnés à la peine capitale sont fusillés dans un lieu désigné par l&apos;autorité militaire. &quot; } which entailed execution by firing squad. { Pre-1981 penal code, article 13 : &quot; By exception to article 12, when the death penalty is handed for crimes against the safety of the State, execution shall take place by firing squad. &quot;. } [ Reign of Terror ] { Francisco de Goya – &apos;&apos;The French Penalty&apos;&apos;. } The period from June 1793 to July 1794 in France is known as the Reign of Terror or simply &quot; the Terror &quot;. The upheaval following the overthrow of the monarchy, invasion by foreign monarchist powers and the Revolt in the Vendée combined to throw the nation into chaos and the government into frenzied paranoia. Most of the democratic reforms of the revolution were suspended and large-scale executions by guillotine began. The first political prisoner to be executed was Collenot d&apos;Angremont of the National Guard, followed soon after by the King&apos;s trusted collaborator in his ill-fated attempt to moderate the Revolution, Arnaud de Laporte, both in 1792. Former King Louis XVI and Queen Marie Antoinette were executed in 1793. Maximilien Robespierre became one of the most powerful men in the government, and the figure most associated with the Terror. The Revolutionary Tribunal sentenced thousands to the guillotine. Nobility and commoners, intellectuals, politicians and prostitutes, [ June 2007 ] all were liable to be executed on little or no grounds; suspicion of &quot; crimes against liberty &quot; was enough to earn one an appointment with &quot; Madame Guillotine &quot; or &quot; The National Razor &quot;. Estimates of the death toll range between 16,000 and 40,000. [ Reign of Terror http://www.mahalo.com/reign-of-terror ] At this time, Paris executions were carried out in the Place de la Revolution (former Place Louis XV and current Place de la Concorde ); the guillotine stood in the corner near the Hôtel Crillon where the statue of Brest can be found today. { Lons-le-Saunier, 1897. Picture taken on 20 April 1897, in front of the jailhouse of Lons-le-Saunier, Jura. The man who was going to be beheaded was Pierre Vaillat, who killed two elder siblings on Christmas Day, 1896, in order to rob them and was condemned for his crimes on 9 March 1897. } For a time, executions by guillotine were a popular entertainment that attracted great crowds of spectators. Vendors would sell programs listing the names of those scheduled to die. Many people would come day after day and vie for the best locations from which to observe the proceedings; knitting female citizens ( tricoteuse s ) formed a cadre of hardcore regulars, inciting the crowd in the role of atavistic cheerleaders. Parents would bring their children. By the end of the Terror, the crowds had thinned drastically. Excessive repetition had staled even this most grisly of entertainments, and audiences grew bored. Eventually, the National Convention had enough of the Terror, partially fearing for their own lives, and turned against Maximilien Robespierre. On 28 July 1794, he was arrested and executed in the same fashion as those whom he had condemned. This arguably ended the Terror, as the French expressed their discontent with Robespierre&apos;s policy by guillotining him. [ The Reign of Terror French Revolution Exhibit http://www.historywiz.com/terror.htm 7 March 2011 ] Pre-Guillotine Machines: Halifax GibbetAlthough older narratives may tell you that the guillotine was invented in the late 18th century, most recent accounts recognise that similar &apos;decapitation machines&apos; have a long history. The most famous, and possibly one of the earliest, was the Halifax Gibbet, a monolithic wooden structure which was supposedly created from two fifteen foot high uprights capped by a horizontal beam. The blade was an axe head, attached to the bottom of a four and a half foot wooden block that slid up and down via grooves in the uprights. This device was mounted on a large, square, platform which was itself four foot high. The Halifax Gibbet was certainly substantial, and may date from as early as 1066, although the first definite reference is from the 1280&apos;s. Executions took place in the town&apos;s Market Place on Saturdays, and the machine remained in use until April 30th, 1650. Pre-Guillotine Machines: IrelandAnother early example is immortalised in the picture &apos;The execution of Murcod Ballagh near to Merton in Ireland 1307&apos;. As the title suggests, the victim was called Murcod Ballagh, and he was decapitated by equipment which looks remarkably similar to the later French guillotines. Another, unrelated, picture depicts the combination of a guillotine style machine and a traditional beheading. The victim is lying on a bench, with an axe head held above his neck by some sort of mechanism. The difference lies in the executioner, who is shown wielding a large hammer, ready to strike the mechanism and drive the blade down. If this device existed, it may have been an attempt to improve the accuracy of the impact. [ Retirement ] The last public guillotining was of Eugen Weidmann, who was convicted of six murders. He was beheaded on 17 June 1939, outside the prison Saint-Pierre rue Georges Clemenceau 5 at Versailles, which is now the Palais de Justice. A number of problems with that execution (inappropriate behavior by spectators, incorrect assembly of the apparatus, and the fact it was secretly filmed) caused the authorities to conduct future executions in the prison courtyard. The guillotine remained the official method of execution in France until the death penalty was abolished in 1981. { Loi n°81-908 du 9 octobre 1981 portant abolition de la peine de mort } The last guillotining in France was that of torture-murderer Hamida Djandoubi on September 10, 1977. In the late 1840s the Tussaud brothers Joseph and Francis, gathering relics for Madame Tussauds wax museum visited the aged Henry-Clément Sanson, grandson of the executioner Charles Henri Sanson, where they secured parts, the knife and lunette, of one the original guillotines used during the Age of Terror. The executioner had &quot; pawned his guillotine, and got into woeful trouble for alleged trafficking in municipal property &quot;. { Leonard Cottrell, Madame Tussaud, Evans Brothers Limited, 1952, p. 142-43. } [ Elsewhere ] German Fallbeil of 1854, Munich (Historic replica 1:6 scale) { Museum of Scotland, Edinburgh. } There were guillotine-like devices in countries other than France before 1792. A number of countries, especially in Europe, continued to employ this method of execution into modern times. In England, the Halifax Gibbet was an early guillotine, or decapitating machine, named after the town of its provenance. Its first recorded use was in 1286 and the last in 1650. In Antwerp, Belgium, the last beheaded was Francis Kol. Convicted for robbery with murder, he received his punishment on 8 May 1856. During the period from 19 March 1798 until 12 March 1856, Antwerp counted 19 beheadings. { Gazet van Mechelen, 8 May 1956 } In Germany, where the guillotine is known in German as Fallbeil ( &quot; falling axe &quot; ), it was used in various German states from the 17th century onwards, becoming the usual method of execution in Napoleonic times in many parts of Germany. The guillotine and the firing squad were the legal methods of execution during the German Empire (1871–1918) and the Weimar Republic (1919–1933). The original German guillotines resembled the French Berger 1872 model but eventually evolved into more specialised machines largely built of metal with a much heavier blade enabling shorter uprights to be used. Accompanied by a more efficient blade recovery system and the eventual removal of the tilting board (or bascule) this allowed a quicker turn-around time between executions, the victim being decapitated either face up or down depending on how the executioner predicted they would react to the sight of the machine. Those deemed likely to struggle were backed up from behind a curtain to shield their view of the device. In 1933, Adolf Hitler had a guillotine constructed and tested. He was impressed enough to order 20 more constructed and pressed into immediate service. [ September 2011 ] Nazi records indicate that between 1933 and 1945, 16,500 people were executed in Germany and Austria by this method. The Scottish Maiden (based on the Halifax Gibbet) was introduced to Edinburgh, by James Douglas, 4th Earl of Morton in the 16th century. It continued in use until 1708. The scaffold itself is now housed in the National Museum of Scotland. In Sweden, where beheading was the mandatory method of execution, the guillotine was used only once, for the very last execution in the country, in 1910 at Långholmen Prison, Stockholm. In South Vietnam, after the Diệm regime enacted the 10/59 Decree in 1959, mobile special military courts dispatched to the countryside to intimidate the rural peoples used guillotines belonging to the former French colonial power to carry out death sentences on the spot. [ Mrs Nguyen Thi Dinh Mai V. Elliott No Other Road to Take: Memoir of Mrs Nguyen Thi Dinh Cornell University Southeast Asia Program 1976 1 27 0-87727-102-X ] One such guillotine is still on show at the War Remnants Museum in Ho Chi Minh City. [ Farrara Andrew J. Around the World in 220 Days: The Odyssey of an American Traveler Abroad Buy Books 2004 1 415 0-7414-1838-X ] [ Living heads ] [ Decapitation December 2011 ] Execution of Languille in 1905 From its first use, there has been debate as to whether the guillotine always provided a swift death as Guillotin had hoped. With previous methods of execution intended to be painful, there was little concern about the suffering inflicted. As the guillotine was invented specifically to be humane, however, the issue was seriously considered. The blade cuts quickly enough so that there is relatively little impact on the brain case, and perhaps less likelihood of immediate unconsciousness than with a more violent decapitation, or long-drop hanging. Audiences to guillotinings told numerous stories of blinking eyelids, speaking, moving eyes, movement of the mouth, even an expression of &quot; unequivocal indignation &quot; on the face of the decapitated Charlotte Corday when her cheek was slapped. The following report was written by a Dr. Beaurieux, who experimented with the head of a condemned prisoner by the name of Henri Languille, on 28 June 1905: [ Report From 1905 The History of the Guillotine Dr. Beaurieux http://www.guillotine.dk/Pages/30sek.html 13 February 2009 ] Anatomists and other scientists in several countries have tried to perform more definitive experiments on severed human heads as recently as 1956. Inevitably, the evidence is only anecdotal. What appears to be a head responding to the sound of its name, or to the pain of a pinprick, may be only random muscle twitching or automatic reflex action, with no awareness involved. At worst, it seems that the massive drop in cerebral blood pressure would cause a victim to lose consciousness in a few seconds. { Excerpt from British Medical Journal, Vol 294: February, 1987, quoting Proges Medical of 9 July 1886, on the subject of research into &quot; living heads &quot;. } [ See also ] [ Criminal justice ] Henri Désiré Landru Rozalia Lubomirska Eugen Weidmann Marcel Petiot Bals des victimes Flying guillotine (weapon) Plötzensee Prison Use of capital punishment by nation Use of the Guillotine in Paris [ References ] [ Footnotes ] [ 30em ] [ Further reading ] [ Gerould, Daniel Guillotine; Its Legend and Lore Blast Books 1992 0-922233-02-0 ] Caryle, Thomas. The French Revolution In Three Volumes, Volume 3: The Guillotine. Charles C. Little and James Brown ( Little Brown ). New York, NY, 1839. No ISBN. (First Edition. Many reprintings of this important history have been done during the last two centuries.) Farrell, Simon, Sutherland, Jon. Madame Guillotine: The French Revolution. Armada Books, 1986. ISBN 0-233-97868-2. [ External links ] [ Fabricius Jørn The Guillotine Headquarters http://www.guillotine.dk/ ] The Guillotine Headquarters with a gallery, history, name list, and quiz. L&apos;art de bien couper a French site with a quite complete list of guillotined criminals, pictures, history. Bois de justice History of the guillotine, construction details, with rare photos (English) Does the head remain briefly conscious after decapitation (revisited)? (from The Straight Dope ) Category:Execution methods Category:Capital punishment in France Category:Execution equipment Category:1789 introductions Category:Blade weapons als:Guillotine ar:مقصلة bg:Гилотина bs:Giljotina ca:Guillotina cs:Gilotina da:Guillotine de:Guillotine et:Giljotiin el:Γκιλοτίνα es:Guillotina eo:Gilotino eu:Gillotina fa:گیوتین fr:Guillotine fy:Guillotine ga:Gilitín ko:단두대 hi:गिलोटिन hr:Giljotina io:Gilotino id:Guillotine is:Fallöxi it:Ghigliottina he:גיליוטינה jv:Guillotine ka:გილიოტინა ku:Meşneqe lb:Guillotine lt:Giljotina hu:Nyaktiló mk:Гилотина arz:الجيلوتين nl:Guillotine ja:ギロチン no:Giljotin nn:Giljotin pl:Gilotyna pt:Guilhotina ro:Ghilotină ru:Гильотина simple:Guillotine sk:Gilotína sl:Giljotina sr:Гиљотина sh:Гиљотина fi:Giljotiini sv:Giljotin th:กิโยตีน tr:Giyotin uk:Гільйотина vi:Máy chém zh:斷頭台