[ the 2007 motion picture Puffball (film) the 1980 novel Puffball (novel) ] [ Puffball Lycoperdon umbrinum.JPG 250px Lycoperdon umbrinum, commonly known as the umber-brown puffball Fungi Basidiomycota ] A puffball is a member of any of several groups of fungi in the division Basidiomycota. The puffballs were previously treated as a taxonomic group called the Gasteromycetes or Gasteromycetidae, but they are now known to be a polyphyletic assemblage. The distinguishing feature of all puffballs is that they do not have an open cap with spore-bearing gills. Instead, spores are produced internally, in a spheroidal fruiting body called a gasterothecium (gasteroid (&apos;stomach-like&apos;) basidiocarp ). As the spores mature, they form a mass called a gleba in the centre of the fruiting body that is often of a distinctive color and texture. The basidiocarp remains closed until after the spores have been released from the basidia. Eventually, it develops an aperture, or dries, becomes brittle, and splits, and the spores escape. The spore s of puffballs are statismospores rather than ballistospores, meaning they are not actively shot off the basidium. The fungi are called &apos;puffballs&apos; because cloud s of brown dust-like spore s are emitted when the mature fruiting body bursts, or in response to impacts such as those of falling raindrops. Puffballs and similar forms are thought to have evolved repeatedly (that is, in numerous independent events) from hymenomycetes by gasteromycetation, through secotioid stages. Thus, &apos;Gasteromycetes&apos; and &apos;Gasteromycetidae&apos; are now considered to be descriptive, morphological terms (more properly gasteroid or gasteromycetes, to avoid taxonomic implications) but not valid cladistic terms. Puffballs encompass the genera Calvatia, Calbovista and Lycoperdon. [ Freedman Louise Mycological Society of San Francisco Wild About Mushrooms:Puffballs 1987, 2000 http://www.mssf.org/cookbook/puffballs.html 2008-08-03 ] The true puffballs, of the Lycoperdales, do not consist of a visible stalk (stem). The stalked puffballs, of the lycoperdales, do have a stalk which supports the gleba. None of the stalked puffballs are edible as they are tough and woody mushrooms. The Hymenogastrales are the false puffballs. A gleba which is powdery on maturity is a feature of true puffballs, stalked puffballs and earthstars. False puffballs are hard like rock or brittle. All false puffballs are inedible, as they are tough and bitter to taste. The genus Scleroderma, which has a young purple gleba, should also be avoided. [ Miller Orson K. Mushrooms of North America New York, NY E.P. Dutton Publisher 1977 298 0-525-47482-X ] { Podaxis pistillaris &apos;&apos;, the False Shaggy Mane } Puffballs were traditionally used in Tibet for making ink by burning them, grinding the ash, then putting them in water and adding glue liquid and &quot; a nye shing ma decoction &quot;, which, when pressed for a long time, made a very black dark substance which was used as ink. { Cuppers, Christoph (1989). &quot; On the Manufacture of Ink. &quot; Ancient Nepal - Journal of the Department of Archaeology, Number 113, August-September 1989, p. 5. } [ Edibility and identification ] Spores coming out of puffball fungus While most puffballs are not poisonous, some often look similar to young agarics, especially the deadly Amanita s, such as the Death Cap or Destroying Angel mushrooms. It is for this reason that all puffballs gathered in mushroom hunting should be cut in half lengthwise. Young puffballs in the edible stage, before maturation of the gleba, have undifferentiated white flesh within; whereas the gills of immature Amanita mushrooms can be seen if they are closely examined. Puffball mushrooms on sale at a market in England. The giant puffball, Calvatia gigantea (earlier classified as Lycoperdon giganteum), reaches a foot (30  cm) or more in diameter, and is difficult to mistake for any other fungus. It has been estimated that a large specimen of this fungus when mature will produce around 7 × 10¹² spores. If collected before spores have formed, while the flesh is still white, it may be cooked as slices fried in butter, with a strong earthy, mushroom flavor. It can often be used in recipes that would ordinarily call for eggplant. It does not store well in a freezer - the entire freezer rapidly acquires a strong mushroom smell. Not all true puffball mushrooms are without stalk. Some may also be stalked like the Podaxis pistillaris which is also called the False Shaggy Mane. On the other hand, there are a number of false puffballs that look similar to the true ones. [ Kuo M. Puffballs MushroomExpert.Com 2006, February http://www.mushroomexpert.com/puffballs.html 2008-08-03 ] Battarrea phalloides Calostoma cinnabarina (Stalked Puffball-in-Aspic) Pisolithus tinctorius Tulostoma Simulans Bovista (various) Calvatia (various) Calvatia cyathiformis Calvatia gigantea Calvatia utriformis Calvatia booniana Calvatia fumosa Calvatia lepidophora Calvatia pachyderma Calvatia sculpta Calvatia subcretacea Calbovista subsculpta Handkea utriformis Lycoperdon candidum Lycoperdon echinatum Lycoperdon fusillum Lycoperdon umbrinum Scleroderma auratium Scleroderma geaster Endoptychum agaricoides Nivatogastrium nubigenum Podaxis pistillaris Rhizopogon rubescens Truncocolumella citrina [ Classification ] &apos;&apos;Lycoperdon pyriforme&apos;&apos; Major orders: [ The Fungi of California http://www.mykoweb.com/CAF/ 2008-08-03 ] Calvatia booniana - Calvatia bovista ( Handkea utriformis ) - Calvatia craniiformis - Calvatia cyathiformis - Calvatia fumosa (Handkea fumosa) - Calvatia gigantea - Calvatia lepidophora - Calvatia rubroflava - Calvatia sculpta - Calvatia subcretacea (Handkea subcretacea) - { Basidiomycetes : Agaricales : Lycoperdaceae : Lycoperdon } Lycoperdon foetidum ( Lycoperdon nigrescens ) Lycoperdon perlatum - Lycoperdon pulcherrimum - Lycoperdon pusillum Lycoperdon pyriforme Vascellum curtisii - Vascellum pratense - Geastrum coronatum - Geastrum fornicatum - Geastrum saccatum - Scleroderma areolatum - Scleroderma bovista - Scleroderma cepa - Scleroderma citrinum - Scleroderma meridionale - Scleroderma michiganense - Scleroderma polyrhizum - Scleroderma septentrionale - and various false-truffles ( hypogaeic gasteromycetes ) related to different hymenomycete orders. Similarly, the true truffles ( Tuberales ) are gasteroid Ascomycota. Their ascocarps are called tuberothecia. [ Footnotes ] [ References ] Homobasidiomycetes at the Tree of Life Web Project [ External links ] [ Puff-ball ] Puffballs at AmericanMushrooms.com &quot; Puffballs &quot;, 9-second video of a puffball releasing spores on YouTube. Puffballs or footballs Category:Mushroom types Category:Basidiomycota Category:Edible fungi de:Bauchpilz fr:Vesse-de-loup lb:Poufascht pl:Purchawka ru:Дождевик настоящий sv:Röksvampar th:เห็ดเผาะ zh:马勃