[ St. Bonaventure University Becoming Extraordinary 1858 Private $42 million http://www.sbu.edu/alumniAndFriends.aspx?id=33328 Sr. Margaret Carney, OSF STD Allegany New York USA ~2,000 ~500 ~500 Small town/ rural, 500 acres (2 km²) Athletics Bonnies Brown &amp; White St. Bonaventure University Logo ] St. Bonaventure University is a private, Franciscan Catholic university, located in Allegany, Cattaraugus County, New York, United States. It has roughly 2,400 undergraduate and graduate students. The university was established by the Franciscan Brothers in 1858. Its current president is Sister Margaret Carney OSF STD, the 20th president and the first religious sister to hold the position full time. In athletics, the St. Bonaventure Bonnies play NCAA Division I sports in the Atlantic 10 Conference. Students and alumni often refer to the university as Bona&apos;s, derived from the school&apos;s original name, St. Bonaventure&apos;s College. The college became a university in 1950. [ History ] The college was founded by Utica financier Nicholas Devereux, one of the first to gain land grants in newly surveyed Cattaraugus County from the Holland Land Company. Devereux founded the town of Allegany on the grant, hoping to build a new city. He believed the city would need religious instruction, so Devereux approached John Timon, the bishop of Buffalo, for assistance. The two invited the Franciscan order to Western New York, and a small group under Father Pamfilo da Magliano OFM arrived in 1856. This was the first group of Franciscan brothers to settle in the United States. The school graduated its first class in 1858. St. Bonaventure&apos;s College was granted university status by New York State in 1950. The largest residence hall on campus, Devereux Hall, is named for the founder. Once one of the nation&apos;s most prominent Catholic colleges, St. Bonaventure ran into financial difficulties in the early 1990s, and nearly declared bankruptcy in 1994. Since then, the school has been put on a more solid financial footing and has seen record growth and campus improvements in the past five years. Thomas Merton, the religious writer, taught English at St. Bonaventure for a year just at the start of World War II. It was at this school that Merton finally gave into his vocation and decided to join the Trappists. He entered the monastery in Kentucky in 1941. A heart-shaped clearing on a mountain in view of campus is linked to Merton in campus myth. Some students call it &quot; Merton&apos;s Heart &quot; and claim that Merton visited the place often and that the trees fell when he died. In reality, the hillside had been cleared for oil drilling in the 1920s and trees have since regrown, leaving the bald patch. according to the SBU website. [ Location ] The campus sits on [ 500 acre km2 ] in the town of Allegany, just over the line from the city of Olean (total pop.: 15,000), at Exit 24 of Interstate 86. The university has its own U.S. Post Office. The postal address for the university is Saint Bonaventure, NY 14778. Campus buildings are designed in red brick with Italianate roofs, to reflect the architecture of St. Francis &apos; native Italy. The campus proper has several residence halls, townhouses/apartments and academic buildings. Its expansive front lawn has been cited as the largest front lawn in America. The past couple of years has seen several campus improvements, including a new $6 million recreation center, a new Starbucks-product coffee café, and completely renovated dining hall and residence hall. The state-of-the-art William F. Walsh Science Center is another recent addition. The university is a large landowner in the Allegany area, as part of the original Devereux grant, and offers much to appreciators of nature. The south edge of campus lies on the Allegheny River. A small portion of the campus is wooded. Across the street from campus, the university owns a cemetery, 9-hole golf course, and restaurant. About [ 25 mi km ] from the main campus, the university also has the opportunity to experience the Franciscan eremitical tradition in the Allegheny Mountain foothills in western Clarksville, New York, at a community called Mount Irenaeus. &quot; The Mount, &quot; as it is referred to by students, faculty and alumni, provides a retreat for students. While not owned by the university, Mount Irenaeus has a shared mission with the university and primarily serves its population. St. Bonaventure also has a second campus in Hamburg, a suburb of Buffalo, on the campus of Hilbert College. Some of the graduate classes are taught there, set up on a night and weekend schedule. The Hilbert College library, bookstore, cafeteria, athletic facilities and computer lab are available to St. Bonaventure graduate students during the week, including evenings, and on weekends. A computer lab directly linked to the St. Bonaventure network is located at Hilbert College. [ The Franciscan connection ] The friars at the St. Bonaventure Friary belong to the Holy Name Province and are members of the Order of Friars Minor, OFM, one of the orders of Franciscans. The Bonaventure friars are involved in a number of activities in the greater Olean community, besides ministry on campus. They administer St. Bonaventure&apos;s Parish in Allegany, called &quot; Little Bona&apos;s &quot;. There is a strong Franciscan presence at Olean General Hospital, and the university operates the Warming House, an area soup kitchen believed to be the oldest student-run soup kitchen in the United States. Also adjacent to campus is the Motherhouse of the Franciscan Sisters of Allegany, a group of Franciscan religious sisters. St. Bonaventure himself (1221–74), born John of Fidenza, was a cardinal and Doctor of the Church. A theologian and contemporary of St. Thomas Aquinas at the University of Paris, he became head of the Franciscan order and did much to institutionalize that order. His most famous work is Itinerarium mentis in deum, or The Soul&apos;s Journey to God. Bonaventure was canonized in 1482 by Sixtus IV. The university is also home to the Franciscan Institute. Founded in 1939 by Fr. Thomas Plassmann, O.F.M., then president of St. Bonaventure College, and led by its first Director, Fr. Philotheus Boehner, O.F.M., the Franciscan Institute stands as the preeminent center in North America of teaching, research and publication on the history, spirituality and intellectual life of the Franciscan movement. Recently the University took part in a conference through the Franciscan Institute. St. Bonaventure was host to one part of a four part world wide conference series on John Duns Scotus. There were four parts, only one of which was in America at St. Bonaventure. The other three were in Germany, Italy and Oxford, England. [ The University today ] The school is well known in New York state and the mid-Atlantic region for its journalism, business and education programs, having produced five Pulitzer Prize -winning writers. Combined degree health care programs guarantee admission to medical school for more than 30 students annually, preparing freshmen for careers in medicine, dentistry, physical therapy or pharmacy. The university has more than 50 academic programs. SBU graduates are leading some of the world&apos;s largest and most well-known businesses and schools. They&apos;re also working for every major broadcast network, and many of the world&apos;s most-read major print and electronic publications. In addition: -- 90% of undergraduates say they&apos;d choose St. Bonaventure again. -- 90% are employed or move on to graduate work within six months of graduation. -- the placement rate for MBA/Accounting graduates is nearly 100% -- Finance majors scored in the top 5% on the Finance portion of the Major Field Exam each of the last 7 years. St. Bonaventure&apos;s trend-setting Career and Professional Readiness Center plays a big role in ensuring the future success of SBU graduates. More than your typical college career center, St. Bonaventure&apos;s CPRC provides students with extraordinary resources to enhance their ability to find an internship, land that first job, or win acceptance to their graduate school of choice. St. Bonaventure is accredited by the Middle States Association, National Council for Accreditation of Teacher Education (NCATE), and the Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business (AACSB). The Regina A. Quick Center for the Arts hosts several art galleries and a 321-seat theater. St. Bonaventure is home to the Russell J. Jandoli School of Journalism and Mass Communications. Its campus newspaper, The Bona Venture, has been published continuously since 1926. Known on campus as The BV, the newspaper has earned The Pacemaker Award numerous times from the Associated Collegiate Press, the last time in 1994. The school is also home to The Laurel, the nation&apos;s oldest continuously published college literary magazine. The school&apos;s student radio station, WSBU 88.3 The Buzz, is ranked No. 1 nationally by The Princeton Review. The school has a unique organization known as SFM (Students for the Mountain). SFM holds retreats for students at the Franciscan Mountain Retreat Centre at Mount Irenaeus, including BonaResponds — which sent nearly 300 people to the Gulf Coast in the wake of Hurricane Katrina and continues to perform relief work at home and across the county — and SIFE (Students in Free Enterprise), which has established successful business and education programs in the Bahamas. St. Bonaventure is strongly identified with the Western New York region. A notable proportion of the student body are from the Buffalo and Rochester metro areas, and references to Buffalo and Rochester —and their Catholic high schools—are common even among students not from those areas. However, the university has students from 34 states and nearly a dozen countries. [ Athletics ] [ February 2011 section ] St. Bonaventure Bonnies logo [ St. Bonaventure Bonnies ] St. Bonaventure is a member of the Atlantic 10 Conference and offers 14 varsity athletic programs. The school&apos;s programs are known as the Bonnies, and colors are brown and white. Four St. Bonaventure alumni have been elected to professional halls of fame: Baseball legends Hughie Jennings and John McGraw, for whom the university&apos;s athletic fields are named, are in the Baseball Hall of Fame; Bob Lanier, &apos;70, who led St. Bonaventure to the NCAA Final Four, is in the Basketball Hall of Fame; and Jack Butler, &apos;51, who had a stellar career with the Pittsburgh Steelers, was elected to the Pro Football Hall of Fame. Division I sports offered: Baseball Basketball, Men&apos;s &amp; Women&apos;s Cross Country, Men&apos;s &amp; Women&apos;s Golf Lacrosse, Women&apos;s Soccer, Men&apos;s &amp; Women&apos;s Softball Swimming &amp; Diving, Men&apos;s &amp; Women&apos;s Tennis, Men&apos;s &amp; Women&apos;s Club sport offerings: Downhill Skiing Ice Hockey, Men&apos;s Field Hockey Lacrosse, Men&apos;s Rugby, Men&apos;s &amp; Women&apos;s Volleyball, Men&apos;s &amp; Women&apos;s [ Graduate program offerings ] Dual admissions program: These programs are available for high school students who are looking for careers in health care. To be admitted to these programs, students must have suitable credentials and are expected to maintain a specific level of academic performance while at SBU. B.S./D.P.T. Physical Therapy (3+4 Program with Daemen College ) B.S./M.D. Medicine (4+4 Program with the George Washington University School of Medicine) B.S./D.O. Osteopathic Medicine (Program with Lake Erie College of Osteopathic Medicine ) B.S./D.Pharm Pharmacy (3+3 Program with Lake Erie College of Osteopathic Medicine ) B.S./D.D.S Dental Medicine (3+3 Program with the State University of New York at Buffalo ) Early Assurance Program with State University of New York Upstate Medical University Graduate course offerings: MSED Counselor Education Community Mental Health MSED Counselor Education School MSED Adolescent Literacy MSED Childhood Literacy MSED Adolescence Education MSED Advanced Inclusive Processes MSED Educational Leadership Integrated Marketing Communications Masters of Business Administration Masters of Professional Leadership Master of Arts in English Masters in Franciscan Studies [ Notable alumni ] Notable alumni of St. Bonaventure University include: Jim Baron, basketball coach John Boccieri, Congressman Janet Bodnar, financial expert and editor John Boland, Buffalo labor priest J. R. Bremer, basketball player John R. Broderick, university president Jack Butler, football player Neil Cavuto, news anchor for Fox News and Fox Business Freddie Crawford, basketball player Chuck Daly, basketball coach Charles J. Dougherty, university president Terrence Durham, basketball player Ed Don George, professional wrestler Edward Goljan, Professor of Pathology at Oklahoma State University College of Osteopathic Medicine and author of the popular Rapid Review Pathology George Hays, football player Dan Herbeck, journalist John Iamarino, Commissioner of the Southern Conference Louis Iasiello, former chief of naval chaplains Hughie Jennings, baseball player and manager Mychal Judge, chaplain, victim of the September 11 attacks George Kenneally, football player Patricia Kennealy-Morrison, author, journalist, editor Bob Lanier, basketball player Michael Lynch, population geneticist and academic at Indiana University Ted Marchibroda, football coach Whitey Martin, former NBA player John McGraw, baseball player Andrew Nicholson, basketball player Carl Paladino, 2010 New York State Republican gubernatorial candidate James Post, university professor Thomas P. Ryan, Jr. Mayor of Rochester, New York 1974-1994 Mike Vaccaro, journalist Adrian Wojnarowski, sports journalist Catharine Young, New York State Senator Mark Zinni, news anchor [ Pulitzer Prize winners and members of Congress ] The school boasts five Pulitzer Prize winners as alumni. Robert A. Dubill &apos;58, former executive editor of USA Today. Won in 1980 for public service (uncovering religious fund-raising scandals). John Hanchette &apos;64, former managing editor of Gannett Newspapers, now professor of journalism at St. Bonaventure. Won in 1980 for public service (uncovering religious fund-raising scandals). Dan Barry &apos;80, reporter for The New York Times. Won in 1994 for investigative reporting (corruption in Rhode Island court system). Brian Toolan &apos;72, vice president of The Hartford Courant. Won in 1999 for breaking news reporting ( shooting at the Connecticut Lottery ). Charles J. Hanley &apos;68, reporter for the Associated Press. Won in 2000 for investigative reporting (the massacre at No Gun Ri ). Five Members of the United States Congress attended St. Bonaventure. Rudolph G. Tenerowicz, U.S. Rep. from Michigan (Dem. &amp; Rep., 1939–43, 49–57) William F. Walsh &apos;34, U.S. Rep. from New York (Rep., 1973–1979) James J. Howard &apos;52, U.S. Rep from New Jersey (1965–1988) James T. Walsh &apos;70, U.S. Rep. from New York (Rep., 1989–2009) John Boccieri &apos;92, U.S. Rep. from Ohio (Dem., 2009–2011) [ References ] [ External links ] Official website Official Athletics website [ 42.078094 N 78.481307 W region:US-NY_type:edu title,inline ] [ St. Bonaventure University ] Category:Educational institutions established in 1858 Category:Universities and colleges in New York Category:Roman Catholic universities and colleges in the United States Category:Franciscan universities and colleges Category:Council of Independent Colleges Category:National Association of Independent Colleges and Universities members Category:Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools Category:Education in Cattaraugus County, New York Category:Visitor attractions in Cattaraugus County, New York es:Universidad de San Buenaventura (Nueva York) no:St. Bonaventure University simple:St. Bonaventure University