[ Dawes Act ] The Dawes Plan (as proposed by the Dawes Committee, chaired by Charles G. Dawes ) was an attempt in 1924 to solve the reparations problem, which had bedeviled international politics, in the wake of the Ruhr occupation and the hyperinflation crisis. It provided for the Allies to collect war reparations debt from Germany. Intended as an interim measure, the Young Plan was adopted in 1929 to replace it. [ Background: World War I Europe ] [ The initial German debt default ] At the conclusion of World War I, the Triple Entente included in the Treaty of Versailles a plan for reparations to be paid by Germany. The amount of these initial payments was reduced from 269 to 226 billion German Gold Marks in 1921 but in 1923 Germany defaulted on its ability to deliver further amounts of coal and steel. In response to this, French and Belgian troops occupied the Ruhr River valley inside the borders of Germany. This occupation of the centre of the German coal and steel industries outraged the German people, who, in response, passively resisted the occupation, thus leading to a further strain on Germany&apos;s economy, significantly contributing to the hyperinflation that followed. { Noakes, Jeremy. Documents on Nazism, 1919-1945. pg 53 } [ The Barclay School Committee is established ] To simultaneously defuse this situation and increase the chances of Germany resuming reparation payments, the Allied Reparations Commission asked Dawes to find a solution fast.The Dawes committee, which was urged into action by Britain and the United States, consisted of ten informal expert representatives, { Rostow, Eugene V. Breakfast for Bonaparte U.S. national security interests from the Heights of Abraham to the nuclear age. Washington, D.C: National Defense UP, For sale by the Supt. of Docs., U.S. G.P.O., 1993. } two each from Belgium (Baron Maurice Houtart, Emile Francqui ), France (Jean Parmentier, Edgard Allix), Britain (Sir Josiah C. Stamp, Sir Robert M. Kindersley), Italy (Alberto Pirelli, Frederico Flora), and the United States (Dawes and Owen D. Young). It was entrusted with finding a solution for the collection of the German reparations debt, which was determined to be 132 billion gold marks, as well as declaring that America would provide loans to the Germans, in order that they could make reparations payments to the United States, Britain and France. [ Main points of the Dawes Plan ] In an agreement of August 1924, the main points of The Dawes Plan were: The Ruhr area was to be evacuated by Allied occupation troops. Reparation payments would begin at “one billion marks the first year, increasing to two and a half billion marks annually after five years &quot; (Merrill 93). The Reichsbank would be reorganized under Allied supervision. The sources for the reparation money would include transport ation, excise, and custom taxes. The Dawes Plan did rely on capital lent to Germany by a consortium of American investment banks led by the Morgan Guarantee Trust Company under supervision by the US State Department. The German economic state was one in which careful footing was required, and the Dawes plan was of the nature that only with the unrelated help of loans from the US could it succeed. The plan was accepted by Germany, which was in no position to refuse, and by the Triple Entente, and went into effect in September 1924. Although German business began to rebound during the mid 1920s and reparation payments were made promptly, it became obvious that the German economy could not sustain the enormous annual payments, which had been set deliberately at a crushing level, for long. As a result, the Young Plan was substituted in 1929. [ Results of the Dawes Plan ] The Dawes Plan provided short-term economic benefits to the German economy. It softened the burdens of war reparations, stabilized the currency, and brought increased foreign investments and loans to the German market. However, it made the German economy dependent on foreign markets and economies, and therefore problems with the U.S. economy (e.g. the Great Depression ) would later severely hurt Germany as it did the rest of the western world, which was subject to debt repayments for loans of American dollars. After World War I, this cycle of money from U.S. loans to Germany, which then made reparations to other European nations, which then used the money to pay off their debts to America, locked the western world&apos;s economy on that of the U.S. Dawes was the recipient of the Nobel Peace Prize in 1925, in recognition of his work on the Plan. [ See also ] Germany Charles G. Dawes Hyperinflation War reparations [ World War I ] The Young Plan (replaced the Dawes Plan in 1929) Triple Entente World War I [ World War II ] Industrial plans for Germany Morgenthau Plan, 1945–47 Marshall Plan, 1948–51 Agreement on German External Debts, debt agreement, 1953 [ References ] [ Further reading ] [ The End of the European Era: 1890 to the present Gilbert Felix 1970 Norton New York 0-393-05413-6 ] [ Anglo-American Relations in the 1920s: The Struggle for Supremacy McKercher B. J. C. 1990 University of Alberta Press Edmonton 0-88864-224-5 ] [ The End of French Predominance in Europe: The Financial Crisis of 1924 and the Adoption of the Dawes Plan Schuker Stephen A. 1976 University of North Carolina Press Chapel Hill 0-8078-1253-6 ] [ External links ] The Dawes Plan detailed at The Columbia Encyclopedia, Sixth Edition The Dawes Plan (very briefly) at Encyclopædia Britannica When Money Dies: The Nightmare of the Weimar Collapse, Adam Fergusson Category:History of the foreign relations of the United States Category:Aftermath of World War I Category:French Third Republic Category:Contemporary German history Category:Economic history of France Category:History of Belgium Category:History of the United States (1918–1945) bg:План Дауес cs:Dawesův plán de:Dawes-Plan et:Dawesi plaan es:Plan Dawes eo:Dawes-plano fr:Plan Dawes ko:도스 안 it:Piano Dawes he:תוכנית דוז lt:Daueso planas nl:Dawesplan ja:ドーズ案 no:Dawesplanen pl:Plan Dawesa pt:Plano Dawes ru:План Дауэса sv:Dawesplanen th:แผนการดอวส์ tr:Dawes Planı uk:План Дауеса zh:道威斯計劃