{ cathedral of } { Lisbon. } { Tournai Cathedral, } { Belgium, 12th century. } { Angoulême Cathedral, } { France. } Romanesque architecture is an architectural style of Medieval Europe characterized by semi-circular arch es. There is no consensus for the beginning date of the Romanesque architecture, with proposals ranging from the 6th to the 10th century. It developed in the 12th century into the Gothic style, characterised by pointed arches. Examples of Romanesque architecture can be found across the continent, making it the first pan-European architectural style since Imperial Roman Architecture. The Romanesque style in England is traditionally referred to as Norman architecture. Combining features of Roman and Byzantine buildings, Romanesque architecture is known by its massive quality, thick walls, round arches, sturdy pier s, groin vaults, large towers and decorative arcading. Each building has clearly defined forms and they are frequently of very regular, symmetrical plan so that the overall appearance is one of simplicity when compared with the Gothic buildings that were to follow. The style can be identified right across Europe, despite regional characteristics and different materials. Many castle s were built during this period, but they are greatly outnumbered by church es. The most significant are the great abbey churches, many of which are still standing, more or less complete and frequently in use. { Bannister Fletcher, &apos;&apos;A History of Architecture on the Comparative Method’’. } The enormous quantity of churches built in the Romanesque period was succeeded by the still busier period of Gothic architecture, which partly or entirely rebuilt most Romanesque churches in prosperous areas like England. The largest groups of Romanesque survivors are in areas that were less prosperous in subsequent periods, including parts of Southern France and Northern Spain. Survivals of unfortified Romanesque secular houses and palaces are far rarer, but these used and adapted the features found in church buildings, on a domestic scale. [ Definition ] According to the Oxford English Dictionary, the word &quot; Romanesque &quot;, meaning &quot; descended from Roman &quot;, was first used in English to designate what are now called Romance languages (first cited 1715). Architecturally, the term was first applied in French by the archaeologist Charles de Gerville or his associate Arcisse de Caumont, in 1818, to describe European architecture from the 5th to the 13th centuries, at a time when the actual dates of many of the buildings so described had not been ascertained. { Jean Hubert, Romanesque Art. } { Date from Hartmann-Virnich, as below } The first use in a published work is in William Gunn&apos;s An Inquiry into the Origin and Influence of Gothic Architecture (London 1819). { Andreas Hartmann-Virnich: Was ist Romanik, Darmstadt 2004, p. 28-30 } The word was used by Gunn to describe the style that was identifiably Medieval and prefigured the Gothic, yet maintained the rounded Roman arch and thus appeared to be a continuation of the Roman tradition of building. The term is now used for the more restricted period from the late 10th to the 12th century. The term &quot; Pre-romanesque &quot; is sometimes applied to architecture in Germany of the Carolingian and Ottonian periods and Visigothic, Mozarab and Asturian constructions between the 8th and the 10th centuries in the Iberian Peninsula while &quot; First Romanesque &quot; is applied to buildings in north of Italy and Spain and parts of France that have Romanesque features but pre-date the influence of the monastery of Cluny. [ History ] [ Pre-Romanesque art and architecture ] [ Origins ] Romanesque architecture was the first distinctive style to spread across Europe since the Roman Empire. Despite the impression of 19th century Art Historians that Romanesque architecture was a continuation of the Roman, in fact, Roman building techniques in brick and stone were largely lost in most parts of Europe, and in the more northern countries had never been adopted except for official buildings, while in Scandinavia they were unknown. There was little continuity, even in Rome, where several great Constantinian basilica s continued to stand as an inspiration to later builders. It was not the buildings of ancient Rome, but the 6th century octagonal Byzantine Basilica of San Vitale in Ravenna that was to inspire the greatest building of the Dark Ages in Europe, the Emperor Charlemagne &apos;s Palatine Chapel, Aachen, Germany, built around the year AD 800. { Helen Gardner, &apos;&apos;Art through the Ages’’. } Dating shortly after the Palatine Chapel is a remarkable 9th century Swiss manuscript known as the Plan of Saint Gall and showing a very detailed plan of a monastic complex, with all its various monastic buildings and their functions labelled. The largest building is the church, the plan of which is distinctly Germanic, having an apse at both ends, an arrangement not generally seen elsewhere. Another feature of the church is its regular proportion, the square plan of the crossing tower providing a module for the rest of the plan. These features can both be seen at the Proto-Romanesque St. Michael&apos;s Church, Hildesheim, 1001–1030. Architecture of a Romanesque style also developed simultaneously in the north of Italy, parts of France and in the Iberian Peninsula in the 10th century and prior to the later influence of the Abbey of Cluny. The style, sometimes called &quot; First Romanesque &quot; or &quot; Lombard Romanesque &quot;, is characterised by thick walls, lack of sculpture and the presence of rhythmic ornamental arches known as a Lombard band. [ center horizontal center Origins Santa Maria in Cosmedin-templom belso.jpg 184 The interior of a narrow and rather dark church that has columns down each side supporting a plain wall with small high windows. Santa Maria in Cosmedin, Rome (8th  — early 12th century) has a basilical plan and reuses ancient Roman columns. Aachener1723aDom.jpg 163 The interior of a tall octagonal church, rising in three rows of decorated arches. A large candelabra hangs above the central altar. Charlemagne &apos;s Palatine Chapel, Aachen, C. 9th, modelled on the octagonal Byzantine church of San Vitale in Ravenna Hildesheim-St Michaels Church.interior.01.JPG 183 The interior of another long narrow church with high windows. The arch leading into the chancel at the far end has alternating red and white stones. Interior of St. Michael&apos;s, Hildesheim, (1001-31) with alternating piers and columns and a C.13th painted wooden ceiling Bundesarchiv B 145 Bild-F078941-0014, Hildesheim, Michaeliskirche.jpg 160 The exterior of the same church shows a short square tower with a pointed metal roof over the crossing, and a small round tower at the end of the transept. St. Michael&apos;s Church, Hildesheim has similar characteristics to the church in the Plan of Saint Gall. ] [ Politics ] Charlemagne was crowned by the Pope in St. Peter&apos;s Basilica on Christmas Day in the year AD 800, with an aim to re-establishing the old Roman Empire. Charlemagne&apos;s political successors continued to rule much of Europe, with a gradual emergence of the separate political states that were eventually to become welded into nations, either by allegiance or defeat, the Kingdom of Germany giving rise to the Holy Roman Empire. The invasion of England by William, Duke of Normandy, in 1066, saw the building of both castles and churches that reinforced the Norman presence. Several significant churches that were built at this time were founded by rulers as seats of temporal and religious power, or places of coronation and burial. These include the Abbaye-Saint-Denis, Speyer Cathedral and Westminster Abbey (where little of the Norman church now remains). At a time when the remaining architectural structures of the Roman Empire were falling into decay and much of its learning and technology lost, the building of masonry domes and the carving of decorative architectural details continued unabated, though greatly evolved in style since the fall of Rome, in the enduring Byzantine Empire. The domed churches of Constantinople and Eastern Europe were to greatly affect the architecture of certain towns, particularly through trade and through the Crusades. The most notable single building that demonstrates this is St Mark&apos;s Basilica, Venice but there are many lesser known examples, particularly in France, such as the church of Saint-Front, Périgueux and Angoulême Cathedral. { George Holmes, ed. The Oxford History of Medieval Europe. } Much of Europe was affected by feudalism in which peasants held tenure from local rulers over the land that they farmed in exchange for military service. The result of this was that they could be called upon, not only for local and regional spats, but to follow their lord to travel across Europe to the Crusades, if they were required to do so. The Crusades, 1095–1270, brought about a very large movement of people and, with them, ideas and trade skills, particularly those involved in the building of fortifications and the metal working needed for the provision of arms, which was also applied to the fitting and decoration of buildings. The continual movement of people, rulers, nobles, bishops, abbots, craftsmen and peasants, was an important factor in creating a homogeneity in building methods and a recognizable Romanesque style, despite regional differences. Life became generally less secure after the Carolingian period. This resulted in the building of castles at strategic points, many of them being constructed as strongholds of the Normans, descendants of the Vikings who invaded northern France in 911. Political struggles also resulted in the fortification of many towns, or the rebuilding and strengthening of walls that remained from the Roman period. One of the most notable surviving fortifications is that of the city of Carcassonne. The enclosure of towns brought about a lack of living space within the walls, and resulted in a style of town house that was tall and narrow, often surrounding communal courtyards, as at San Gimignano in Tuscany. { Rolf Toman, pp. 114-117 } { Copplestone, pp.188-89 } In Germany, the Holy Roman Emperor s built a number of residences, fortified, but essentially palaces rather than castles, at strategic points and on trade routes. The Imperial Palace of Goslar (heavily restored in the 19th century) was built in the early 11th century by Otto III and Henry III, while the ruined Palace at Gelnhausen was received by Frederick Barbarossa prior to 1170. { Rolf Toman, pp. 70-73 } The movement of people and armies also brought about the building of bridges, some of which have survived, including the 12 century bridge at Besalú, Catalonia, the 11th century Puente de la Reina, Navarre and the Pont-Saint-Bénézet, Avignon. { Rolf Toman, pp. 18, 177, 188 } [ center horizontal center Politics London Tower (1).JPG 210 A huge square tower of grey stone is seen beyond fortifications on the edge of a river. The Tower of London, (1078). William the Conqueror built the central White Tower as his stronghold and residence. Speyer---Cathedral---South-View---(Gentry).jpg 237 An enormous cathedral, of red stone with green copper roofs, has a two tall towers framing an octagonal dome at each end of the building. Speyer Cathedral, begun by Conrad II, Holy Roman Emperor in 1030, as an expression of imperial power and architectural innovation Erice castle.jpg 210 A castle with a tall narrow tower and walls topped by battlements stretches along the edge of a cliff covered in trees and palm trees. Erice Castle, Italy, is one of many fortifications built by the Normans in Sicily. San Gimignano.JPG 210 View of a small town on a hilltop surrounded by trees and vineyards. There are eight tall square towers rising from among the densely packed houses. Many towns, such as San Gimignano, were enclosed with walls, causing crowding and the building of tower houses. ] [ Religion ] Across Europe, the late 11th and 12th &quot; centuries &quot; saw an unprecedented growth in the number of churches. { &quot; In the years that followed the year 1000, we witnessed the rebuilding of churches all over the universe, but especially in Italy and Gaul. &quot; Chronicle of Raoul Glaber, quoted by Jean Hubert, Romanesque Art. } A great number of these buildings, both large and small, remain, some almost intact and in others altered almost beyond recognition in later centuries. They include many very well known churches such as Santa Maria in Cosmedin in Rome, { famous for the ancient Roman &quot; Mouth of Truth &quot; set into the wall of its narthex } the Baptistery in Florence { famous for the 15th century Ghiberti Doors } and San Zeno Maggiore in Verona. { traditionally the marriage place of } { Romeo and Juliet } In France, the famous abbeys of Aux Dames and Les Hommes at Caen and Mont Saint-Michel date from this period, as well as the abbeys of the pilgrimage route to Santiago de Compostela. Many cathedrals owe their foundation to this date, with others beginning as abbey churches, and later becoming cathedrals. In England, of the cathedrals of ancient foundation, all were begun in this period with the exception of Salisbury, where the monks relocated from the Norman church at Old Sarum, and several, such as Canterbury, which were rebuilt on the site of Saxon churches. { John Harvey, English Cathedrals } { Alec Clifton-Taylor, The Cathedrals of England } In Spain, the most famous church of the period is Santiago de Compostela. In Germany, the Rhine and its tributaries were the location of many Romanesque abbeys, notably Mainz, Worms, Speyer and Bamberg. In Cologne, then the largest city north of the Alps, a very important group of large city churches survives largely intact. As monasticism spread across Europe, Romanesque churches sprang up in Scotland, Scandinavia, Poland, Hungary, Sicily, Serbia and Tunisia. Several important Romanesque churches were built in the Crusader kingdom s. { Rolf Toman, Romanesque. } [ Architecture National Tourism Organisation of Serbia http://t1.sw4i.com/cms/item/info/en/architecture.html 2007-09-28 ] [ Monasticism ] The system of monasticism in which the religious become members of an order, with common ties and a common rule, living in a mutually dependent community, rather than as a group of hermits living in proximity but essentially separate, was established by the monk Benedict in the 6th century. The Benedictine Monasteries spread from Italy throughout Europe, being always by far the most numerous in England. They were followed by the Cluniac order, the Cistercians, Carthusian s and Augustinian Canons. In association with the Crusades, the military orders of the Knights Hospitaller and the Knights Templar were founded. The monasteries, which sometimes also functioned as cathedrals, and the cathedrals that had bodies of secular clergy often living in community, were a major source of power in Europe. Bishops and the abbots of important monasteries lived and functioned like princes. The monasteries were the major seats of learning of all sorts. Benedict had ordered that all the arts were to be taught and practiced in the monasteries. Within the monasteries books were transcribed by hand, and few people outside the monasteries could read or write. In France, Burgundy was the centre of monasticism. The enormous and powerful monastery at Cluny was to have lasting effect on the layout of other monasteries and the design of their churches. Unfortunately, very little of the abbey church at Cluny remains; the &quot; Cluny II &quot; rebuilding of 963 onwards has completely vanished, but we have a good idea of the design of &quot; Cluny III &quot; from 1088–1130, which until the Renaissance remained the largest building in Europe. However, the church of St. Sernin at Toulouse, 1080–1120, has remained intact and demonstrates the regularity of Romanesque design with its modular form, its massive appearance and the repetition of the simple arched window motif. [ center horizontal center Religion Slidredomen, Vestre Slidre.JPG 210 A little stone church with a little steeple on a wooden belfry sits in a green graveyard overlooking a lake and mountains. Many parish churches across Europe, such as this in Vestre Slidre, Norway, are of Romanesque foundation Abbey-of-senanque-provence-gordes.jpg 232 In a wooded valley is a large church with small windows and a square stone belfry. It is surrounded by ancient buildings arranged around courtyards, and a lavender garden. The Romanesque Sénanque Abbey church and surrounding monastic buildings, Gordes, Provence, France Celles JPG00.jpg 206 The houses of a small town, surrounded by green hillsides, are dominated by a huge church with a large square tower and a spire like a witch&apos;s hat. Collegiate churches such as that of Saint Hadelin, Celles, Belgium, were administered by lay canons. Trier Dom BW 24.JPG 210 A huge cathedral with numerous towers, both square and round, rises above a town square where people are sitting in the shade of clipped trees. Many cathedrals such as Trier Cathedral, Germany, date from this period, with many later additions. ] [ Pilgrimage and Crusade ] One of the effects of the Crusades, which were intended to wrest the Holy Places of Palestine from Islam ic control, was to excite a great deal of religious fervour, which in turn inspired great building programs. The Nobility of Europe, upon safe return, thanked God by the building of a new church or the enhancement of an old one. Likewise, those who did not return from the Crusades could be suitably commemorated by their family in a work of stone and mortar. The Crusades resulted in the transfer of, among other things, a great number of Holy Relics of saint s and apostles. Many churches, like Saint-Front, Périgueux, had their own home grown saint while others, most notably Santiago de Compostela, claimed the remains and the patronage of a powerful saint, in this case one of the Twelve Apostles. Santiago de Compostela, located near Galicia (present day Spain) became one of the most important pilgrimage destinations in Europe. Most of the pilgrims travelled the Way of St. James on foot, many of them barefooted as a sign of penance. They moved along one of the four main routes that passed through France, congregating for the journey at Jumièges, Paris, Vézelay, Cluny, Arles and St. Gall in Switzerland. They crossed two passes in the Pyrenees and converged into a single stream to traverse north-western Spain. Along the route they were urged on by those pilgrims returning from the journey. On each of the routes abbeys such as those at Moissac, Toulouse, Roncesvalles, Conques, Limoges and Burgos catered for the flow of people and grew wealthy from the passing trade. Saint-Benoît-du-Sault, in the Berry province, is typical of the churches that were founded on the pilgrim route. [ center horizontal center Pilgrimage and crusade Jerusalem Holy Sepulchre BW 23.JPG 215 The Church of the Holy Sepulchre, Jerusalem, a major pilgrimage site from the 4th century onwards, its rotunda inspired the construction of many Romanesque circular churches. Krak des chevaliers15(js).jpg 236 Like many castles built by crusader knights, the inner fortress of Krak des Chevaliers, Syria, was mainly constructed in this period, with the outer walls being later. Abbatiale de Conques.jpg 207 The Abbey of Saint Foy, Conques, France, was one of many such abbeys to be built along the pilgrimage Way of St James that led to Santiago de Compostela. Périgueux 3.JPG 207 The plan of the Church of Saint Front, Perigueux, France, was influenced by Byzantine architecture seen by the Crusaders, and has five domes. ] [ Characteristics ] The general impression given by Romanesque architecture, in both ecclesiastical and secular buildings, is one of massive solidity and strength. In contrast with both the preceding Roman and later Gothic architecture, in which the load-bearing structural members are, or appear to be, columns, pilasters and arches, Romanesque architecture, in common with Byzantine architecture, relies upon its walls, or sections of walls called piers. Romanesque architecture is often divided into two periods known as the &quot; First Romanesque &quot; style and the &quot; Romanesque &quot; style. The difference is chiefly a matter of the expertise with which the buildings were constructed. The First Romanesque employed rubble walls, smaller windows and unvaulted roofs. A greater refinement marks the Second Romanesque, along with increased use of the vault and dressed stone. [ Walls ] The walls of Romanesque buildings are often of massive thickness with few and comparatively small openings. They are often double shells, filled with rubble. The building material differs greatly across Europe, depending upon the local stone and building traditions. In Italy, Poland, much of Germany and parts of the Netherlands, brick is generally used. Other areas saw extensive use of limestone, granite and flint. The building stone was often used in comparatively small and irregular pieces, bedded in thick mortar. Smooth ashlar masonry was not a distinguishing feature of the style, particularly in the earlier part of the period, but occurred chiefly where easily worked limestone was available. { Rene Hyughe, &apos;&apos;Larousse Encyclopedia of Byzantine and Medieval Art } [ Buttresses ] Because of the massive nature of Romanesque walls, buttress es are not a highly significant feature, as they are in Gothic architecture. Romanesque buttresses are generally of flat square profile and do not project a great deal beyond the wall. In the case of aisled churches, barrel vaults, or half-barrel vaults over the aisles helped to buttress the nave, if it was vaulted. In the cases where half-barrel vaults were used, they effectively became like flying buttress es. Often aisles extended through two storeys, rather than the one usual in Gothic architecture, so as to better support the weight of a vaulted nave. In the case of Durham Cathedral, flying buttresses have been employed, but are hidden inside the triforium gallery. [ center horizontal center Walls and buttresses Abaziasanvittorefrasassi.jpg thumb 224 A small church sits on a steep rise, surrounded by craggy mountains. It is basically square with three bulging projections and a castle-like tower. The monastery of San Vittore alle Chiuse, Genga, Italy, of undressed stone, has a typically fortress-like appearance with small windows of early Romanesque. Castle-rising-castle.JPG 224 A large square castle keep of pinkish-grey stone, with a projecting entrance tower, has architectural details to its windows, mouldings and stonework. Castle Rising, England, shows flat buttresses and reinforcing at the corners of the building typical in both castles and churches. FranceNormandieCerisyLaForetAbbaye.jpg 190 A tall church of grey stone with fine details and a crossing tower topped with a slate-covered spire rises out of rural countryside, where two mares are grazing. Abbaye Cerisy le Foret, Normandy, France, has a compact appearance with aisles rising through two storeys buttressing the vault. StAlbansCathedral-PS01.JPG 224 A long, low cathedral has a fine Norman brick crossing-tower rising in three stages of round-topped paired windows. The rest of the building is a conglomeration of styles in ancient brick, modern brick, ashlar and flint. St Albans Cathedral England, demonstrates the typical alterations made to the fabric of many Romanesque buildings in different styles and materials ] [ Arches and openings ] The arches used in Romanesque architecture are nearly always semicircular, for openings such as doors and windows, for vaults and for arcades. Wide doorways are usually surmounted by a semi-circular arch, except where a door with a lintel is set into a large arched recess and surmounted by a semi-circular &quot; lunette &quot; with decorative carving. These doors sometimes have a carved central jamb. Narrow doors and small windows might be surmounted by a solid stone lintel. Larger windows are nearly always arched and may be paired with two arches separated by a column, or occur as paired windows framed by a single larger arch. Occular windows are common in Italy, particularly in the facade gable and are also seen in Germany. Later Romanesque churches may have wheel windows or rose window s with plate tracery. There are a very small number of buildings in the Romanesque style, such as Autun Cathedral in France and Monreale Cathedral in Sicily in both of which pointed arches have been used extensively, apparently for stylistic reasons. It is believed that in these cases there is a direct imitation of Islamic architecture. Other late Romanesque churches such as Durham Cathedral introduce the pointed arch in as a structural device. [ Arcades ] An arcade is a row of arches, supported on piers or columns. They occur in the interior of large churches, separating the nave from the aisles, and in large secular interiors spaces, such as the great hall of a castle, supporting the timbers of a roof or upper floor. Arcades also occur in cloisters and atriums, enclosing an open space. Arcades can occur in storeys or stages. While the arcade of cloister is typically of a single stage, the arcade that divides the nave and aisles in a church is typically of two stages, with a third stage of window openings known as the clerestory rising above them. Arcading on a large scale generally fulfils a structural purpose, but it is also used, generally on a smaller scale, as a decorative feature, both internally and externally where it is frequently &quot; blind arcading &quot; with only a wall or a narrow passage behind it. [ center horizontal center Openings and arcades 9986 - Milano - Sant&apos;Ambrogio - Atrio - Foto Giovanni Dall&apos;Orto 25-Apr-2007.jpg 164 The facade and forecourt of a redbrick church are composed of simple arcades. A brick tower rises up to one side. The atrium and arcaded narthex of Sant&apos;Ambrogio, Milan, Italy, is a harmonious composition of similar arches. Le Puy en Velay 03.jpg 171 A highly ornamental church facade built in alternating courses of red and white stone. The facade of Notre Dame du Puy, le Puy en Velay, France, has a more complex arrangement of diversified arches: Doors of varying widths, blind arcading, windows and open arcades. Nivelles JPG00 (5).jpg 185 A tall rectangular structure of grey stone and stern appearance with a jutting apse and a small octagonal belfry. The Collegiate Church of Nivelles, Belgium uses fine shafts of Belgian marble to define alternating blind openings and windows. Upper windows are similarly separated into two openings by colonettes. Detall de la Catedral de Worms.JPG 185 The apsidal end of a tall red stone church framed by circular towers. Worms Cathedral, Germany, displays a great variety of openings and arcades including wheel and rose windows, many small simple windows, galleries and Lombard courses. Abadia de Saint-Pierre de Moissac - Portalada sud.JPG 164 A very large porch of yellowish stone, with a single enormous, slightly pointed archway, juts from the side of a building. The south portal of the Abbey of Saint Pierre, Moissac, France, has a square door divided by an ornate doorpost, surmounted by a carved tympanum and set within a vast arched porch. ] [ Piers ] In Romanesque architecture, pier s were often employed to support arches. They were built of masonry and square or rectangular in section, generally having a horizontal moulding representing a capital at the springing of the arch. Sometimes piers have vertical shafts attached to them, and may also have horizontal mouldings at the level of base. Although basically rectangular, piers can often be of highly complex form, with half-segments of large hollow-core columns on the inner surface supporting the arch, or a clustered group of smaller shafts leading into the mouldings of the arch. Piers that occur at the intersection of two large arches, such as those under the crossing of the nave and transept, are commonly cruciform in shape, each arch having its own supporting rectangular pier at right angles to the other. [ Columns ] Columns are an important structural feature of Romanesque architecture. Colonnettes and attached shafts are also used structurally and for decoration. Monolithic columns cut from a single piece of stone were frequently used in Italy, as they had been in Roman and Early Christian architecture. They were also used, particularly in Germany, when they alternated between more massive piers. Arcades of columns cut from single pieces are also common in structure that do not bear massive weights of masonry, such as cloisters, where they are sometimes paired. [ Salvaged columns ] In Italy, during this period, a great number of antique Roman columns were salvaged and reused in the interiors and on the porticos of churches. The most durable of these columns are of marble and have the stone horizontally bedded. The majority are vertically bedded and are sometimes of a variety of colours. They may have retained their original Roman capitals, generally of the Corinthian or Roman Composite style. Some buildings, like Santa Maria in Cosmedin (illustrated above) and the atrium at San Clemente in Rome, may have an odd assortment of columns in which large capitals are placed on short columns and small capitals are placed on taller columns to even the height. Architectural compromises of this type are seen where materials have been salvaged from a number of buildings. Salvaged columns were also used to a lesser extent in France. [ Drum columns ] In most parts of Europe, Romanesque columns were massive, as they supported thick upper walls with small windows, and sometimes heavy vaults. The most common method of construction was to build them out of stone cylinders called drums, as in the crypt at Speyer Cathedral. { This technique was also used in the Classical world, notably at the } { Parthenon. } [ Hollow core columns ] Where really massive columns were called for, such as those at Durham Cathedral, they were constructed of ashlar masonry and the hollow core was filled with rubble. These huge untapered columns are sometimes ornamented with incised decorations. [ Alternation ] A common characteristic of Romanesque buildings, occurring both in churches and in the arcades that separate large interior spaces of castles, is the alternation of piers and columns. The most simple form that this takes is to have a column between each adjoining pier. Sometimes the columns are in multiples of two or three. At St. Michael&apos;s, Hildesheim, an ABBA alternation occurs in the nave while an ABA alternation can be seen in the transepts. At Jumièges there are tall drum columns between piers each of which has a half-column supporting the arch. There are many variations on this theme, most notably at Durham Cathedral where the mouldings and shafts of the piers are of exceptional richness and the huge masonry columns are deeply incised with geometric patterns. Often the arrangement was made more complex by the complexity of the piers themselves, so that it was not piers and columns that alternated, but rather, piers of entirely different form from each other, such as those of Sant&apos; Ambrogio, Milan where the nature of the vault dictated that the alternate piers bore a great deal more weight than the intermediate ones and are thus very much larger. [ center horizontal center Piers and columns Mainzer Dom Wandaufriss.jpg 160 Mainz Cathedral, Germany, has rectangular piers and possibly the earliest example of an internal elevation of 3 stages. MalmesburyAbbey.JPG 182 Malmesbury Abbey, England, has hollow core columns, probably filled with rubble. SantCompostela21.jpg 187 The cathedral of Santiago de Compostela, Spain, has large drum columns with attached shafts. Durham.2.jpg 161 Durham Cathedral, England, has decorated masonry columns and the earliest pointed high ribs. ] [ Capitals ] The foliate Corinthian style provided the inspiration for many Romanesque capitals, and the accuracy with which they were carved depended very much on the availability of original models, those in Italian churches such as Pisa Cathedral or church of Sant&apos;Alessandro in Lucca and southern France being much closer to the Classical than those in England. The Corinthian capital is essentially round at the bottom where it sits on a circular column and square at the top, where it supports the wall or arch. This form of capital was maintained in the general proportions and outline of the Romanesque capital. This was achieved most simply by cutting a rectangular cube and taking the four lower corners off at an angle so that the block was square at the top, but octagonal at the bottom, as can be seen at St. Michael&apos;s Hildesheim. This shaped lent itself to a wide variety of superficial treatments, sometimes foliate in imitation of the source, but often figurative. In Northern Europe the foliate capitals generally bear far more resemblance to the intricacies of manuscript illumination than to Classical sources. In parts of France and Italy there are strong links to the pierced capitals of Byzantine architecture. It is in the figurative capitals that the greatest originality is shown. While some are dependent on manuscripts illustrations of Biblical scenes and depictions of beasts and monsters, others are lively scenes of the legends of local saints. The capitals, while retaining the form of a square top and a round bottom, were often compressed into little more than a bulging cushion-shape. This is particularly the case on large masonry columns, or on large columns that alternate with piers as at Durham. (See illustrated above) [ center horizontal center Capitals Capitel en la Torre de Pisa.JPG 136 Capital of Corinthian form with anthropomorphised details, Pisa Campanile Fromista - Iglesia San Martin 20.jpg 136 Capital of Corinthian form with Byzantine decoration and carved dosseret, Church of San Martín, Frómista, Palencia San Martín de Castañeda capital1116.JPG 120 Capital of simplified concave Corinthian form with billeted abacus, simple dosseret and pronounced annulet. Church of Santa Maria, San Martín de Castañeda Herina capital crop.jpg 148 Capital of convex cubic form with its abacus, concave dosseret and cable decoration defined by polychrome. Herina. Capitals of this shape are often decorated with &quot; Barbaric &quot; carvings of foliage, and mythical creatures. Capitel románico.jpg 135 Capital of amorphous form surmounting a cluster of shafts. The figurative carving shows a winged devil directing Herod to slaughter the Innocents. Monastery of San Juan de Duero, Soria Abbaye de la Sauve Majeure - Interlaced Asps.JPG 120 Capital retaining Corinthian form decorated with intertwined beasts derived from Irish manuscripts. Grande-Sauve Abbey, France ] [ Vaults and roofs ] The majority of buildings have wooden roofs, generally of a simple truss, tie beam or king post form. In the case of trussed rafter roofs, they are sometimes lined with wooden ceilings in three sections like those that survive at Ely and Peterborough cathedrals in England. In churches, typically the aisles are vaulted, but the nave is roofed with timber, as is the case at both Peterborough and Ely. In Italy where open wooden roofs are common, and tie beams frequently occur in conjunction with vaults, the timbers have often been decorated as at San Miniato al Monte, Florence. Vaults of stone or brick took on several different forms and showed marked development during the period, evolving into the pointed ribbed arch characteristic of Gothic architecture. [ Barrel vault ] The simplest type of vaulted roof is the barrel vault in which a single arched surface extends from wall to wall, the length of the space to be vaulted, for example, the nave of a church. An important example, which retains Medieval paintings, is the vault of Saint-Savin-sur-Gartempe, France, of the early 12th century. However, the barrel vault generally required the support of solid walls, or walls in which the windows were very small. [ Groin vault ] Groin vaults occur in early Romanesque buildings, notably at Speyer Cathedral where the high vault of about 1060 is the first employment in Romanesque architecture of this type of vault for a wide nave. In later buildings employing ribbed vaultings, groin vaults are most frequently used for the less visible and smaller vaults, particularly in crypts and aisles. A groin vault is almost always square in plan and is constructed of two barrel vaults intersecting at right angles. Unlike a ribbed vault, the entire arch is a structural member. Groin vaults are frequently separated by transverse arched ribs of low profile as at Speyer and Santiago de Compostela. At La Madeleine, Vézelay, the ribs are square in section, strongly projecting and polychrome. { Nikolaus Pevsner, An Outline of European Architecture } [ Ribbed vault ] In ribbed vaults, not only are there ribs spanning the vaulted area transversely, but each vaulted bay has diagonal ribs. In a ribbed vault, the ribs are the structural members, and the spaces between them can be filled with lighter, non-structural material. Because Romanesque arches are nearly always semi-circular, the structural and design problem inherent in the ribbed vault is that the diagonal span is larger and therefore higher than the transverse span. The Romanesque builders used a number of solutions to this problem. One was to have the centre point where the diagonal ribs met as the highest point, with the infil of all the surfaces sloping upwards towards it, in a domical manner. This solution was employed in Italy at San Michele, Pavia and Sant&apos; Ambrogio, Milan. Another solution was to stilt the transverse ribs, or depress the diagonal ribs so that the centreline of the vault was horizontal, like a that of a barrel vault. The latter solution was used on the sexpartite vaults at both the Saint-Étienne, ( Abbaye-aux-Hommes ) and Sainte-Trinité, ( Abbaye-les-Dames ) at Caen, France, in the late 11th and early 12th centuries. [ Pointed arched vault ] Late in the Romanesque period another solution came into use for regulating the height of diagonal and transverse ribs. This was to use arches of the same diameter for both horizontal and transverse ribs, causing the transverse ribs to meet at a point. This is seen most notably at Durham Cathedral in northern England, dating from 1128. Durham is a cathedral of massive Romanesque proportions and appearance, yet its builders introduced several structural features that were new to architectural design and were later to be hallmark features of the Gothic. Another Gothic structural feature employed at Durham is the flying buttress. However, these are hidden beneath the roofs of the aisles.The earliest pointed vault in France is that of the narthex of La Madeleine, Vézelay, dating from 1130. [ center horizontal center Vaults Saint-Savin nef.jpg 192 A tall narrow church interior with rounds columns in delicate pastel colours that rise without interruption from floor to vault. The painted barrel vault at the Church of Saint Savin sur Gartemps is supported on tall marbled columns. TournusTonnengewölbe.jpg 162 A church interior of yellow stone with arches of alternation red and cream crossing the nave to support an unusual vaulting system. The Church of Saint Philibert of Tournus has a series of transverse barrel vaults supported on arches. F08.Mozac.0191.JPG 161 A narrow space with grey columns with ornate capitals supporting a plastered cross vault without ribs. The aisle of the Abbey Church at Mozac has a groin vault supported on transverse arches. Peterborough south choir aisle.JPG 175 A side aisle with masonry of massive proportions is ribbed with arches of a bold profile. The aisles at Peterborough Cathedral have quadripartite ribbed vaults. (The nave has an ancient painted wooden ceiling.) Abbaye aux hommes intérieur 03.jpeg 180 A tall wide church of grey stone elegantly vaulted with fine ribs. The ribbed vaults at the Abbaye aux Hommes, Caen, are sexpartite and span two bays of the nave. ] [ Ecclesiastical architecture ] [ Plan and section ] Many parish churches, abbey churches and cathedrals are in the Romanesque style, or were originally built in the Romanesque style and have subsequently undergone changes.The simplest Romanesque churches are aisless halls with a projecting apse at the chancel end, or sometimes, particularly in England, a projecting rectangular chancel with a chancel arch that might be decorated with mouldings. More ambitious churches have aisles separated from the nave by arcades. Abbey and cathedral churches generally follow the Latin Cross plan. In England, the extension eastward may be long, while in Italy it is often short or non-existent, the church being of T plan, sometimes with apses on the transept ends as well as to the east. In France the church of St Front, Périgueux, appears to have been modelled on St. Mark&apos;s Basilica, Venice or the Byzantine Church of the Holy Apostles and is of a Greek cross plan with five domes. { Kimball, F., &amp; Edgell, G. H. (1918). A History of Architecture. New York. Harper &amp; Brothers. 621 pages (page 252). } In the same region, Angoulême Cathedral is an aisless church of the Latin cross plan, more usual in France, but is also roofed with domes. In Germany, Romanesque churches are often of distinctive form, having apses at both east and west ends, the main entrance being central to one side. It is probable that this form came about to accommodate a baptistery at the west end. In section, the typical aisled church or cathedral has a nave with a single aisle on either side. The nave and aisles are separated by an arcade carried on piers or on columns. The roof of the aisle and the outer walls help to buttress the upper walls and vault of the nave, if present. Above the aisle roof are a row of windows known as the clerestory, which give light to the nave. During the Romanesque period there was a development from this two-stage elevation to a three-stage elevation in which there is a gallery, known as a triforium, between the arcade and the clerestory. This varies from a simple blind arcade decorating the walls, to a narrow arcaded passage, to a fully developed second story with a row of windows lighting the gallery. [ center horizontal center Plans, section and elevations Dehio I 42 St Gallen.jpg 160 A copy by Georges Dehio (1887) of the church from the Plan of Saint Gall, shows an apse at both ends and paired towers of square and round section. The bi-apsidal plan is most typically found in Germany, as at Worms Cathedral. Dehio 48 Speyer.jpg 160 The plan of Speyer Cathedral has much in common with thePlan of St Gall, including paired round towers. The western apse is replaced by an elaborate &quot; westwork &quot; Plan.cathedrale.Autun.png 200 Autun Cathedral, France, is much simpler in plan, based on square modules rather than rectangular. It has a tri-apsidal east end, and shallow buttresses supporting the vaults. ] [ center horizontal center Dehio I 56 Konstanz Section.jpg 325 This drawing is a reconstruction by Dehio of the appearance of the Romanesque Konstanz Cathedral before its alterations in the Gothic style. It has a typical elevation of nave and aisles with wooden panelled ceilings and an apsidal east end. Kloster arnsburg zisterzienser klosterkirche aufriss langhaus dehio 1888.jpg 252 This nave elevation of Arnsburg Abbey, Germany, shows the typical arrangement of the nave arcade, aisle, clerestory windows and ribbed vault PeterElevDetailDehio.jpg 95 Exterior elevation, Peterborough Cathedral ] [ Church and cathedral east ends ] The eastern end of a Romanesque church is almost always semi-circular, with either a high chancel surrounded by an ambulatory as in France, or a square end from which an apse projects as in Germany and Italy. Where square ends exist in English churches, they are probably influenced by Anglo Saxon churches. Peterborough and Norwich Cathedrals have retained round east ends in the French style. However, in France, simple churches without apses and with no decorative features were built by the Cistercians who also founded many houses in England, frequently in remote areas. { F.H.Crossley, The English Abbey. } [ center horizontal center East end Xhignesse JPG02.jpg 170 The small church of Saint-Pierre Xhignesse, Belgium, has the simplest type of apsidal east end, being a semi-circular termination at the same height as the choir and nave. Seu urgell.jpg 182 The Cathedral of la Seu d&apos;Urgell, Spain, has an apsidal east end projecting at a lower level to the choir and decorated with an arcade below the roofline. This form is usual in Italy and Germany. Abbazia di Sant&apos;Antimo J.JPG 170 The Abbey of Sant&apos;Antimo has a high apsidal end surrounded by an ambulatory and with small projecting apses Fongombault2.jpg 190 The abbey church of Fontgombault displays a cruciform plan, round chancel, apsidal chapels and high nave with lower aisles. ] [ Church and cathedral facades and external decoration ] Romanesque church facades, generally to the west end of the building, are usually symmetrical, have a large central portal made significant by its mouldings or porch and an arrangement of arched-topped windows. In Italy there is often a single central ocular window. The common decorative feature is arcading. Smaller churches often have a single tower that is usually placed to the western end in France or England, either centrally or to one side, while larger churches and cathedrals often have two. In France, Saint-Étienne, Caen presents the model of a large French Romanesque facade. It is a symmetrical arrangement of nave flanked by two tall towers each with two buttresses of low flat profile that divide the facade into three vertical units. The lowest stage is marked by large doors, each set within an arch in each of the three vertical sections. The wider central section has two tiers of three identical windows, while in the outer sections there are two tiers of single windows, giving emphasis to the mass of the towers. The towers rise above the facade through three further tiers, the lowest of tall blind arcading, the next of arcading pierced by two narrow windows and the third of two large windows, divided into two lights by a colonnette. This facade can be seen as the foundation for many other buildings, including both French and English Gothic churches. While the form is typical of northern France, its various components were common to many Romanesque churches of the period across Europe. Similar facades are found in Portugal. In England, Southwell Cathedral has maintained this form, despite the insertion of a huge Gothic window between the towers. Lincoln and Durham must once have looked like this. In Germany, the Limburg Cathedral has a rich variety of openings and arcades in horizontal storeys of varying heights. The churches of San Zeno Maggiore, Verona and San Michele, Pavia present two types of facade that are typical of Italian Romanesque, that which reveals the architectural form of the building, and that which screens it. At San Zeno, the components of nave and aisles are made clear by the vertical shafts that rise to the level of the central gable and by the varying roof levels. At San Miniato al Monte the definition of the architectural parts is made even clearer by the polychrome marble, a feature of many Italian Medieval facades, particularly in Tuscany.At San Michele the vertical definition is present as at San Zeno, but the rooflines are screened behind a single large gable decorated with stepped arcading. At Santa Maria della Pieve, Arezzo, this screening is carried even further, as the roofline is horizontal and the arcading rises in many different levels while the colonettes that support them have a great diversity of decoration. [ center horizontal center Facade Okt 31.jpg 154 Main facade of the Bélapátfalva church, Hungary. LimburgerDomFront.jpg 136 Limburger Dom, Germany, has recently had its polychrome plaster restored. Alba Iulia 2011 - Roman Catholic Cathedral-2.jpg 154 St. Michael&apos;s Cathedral of Alba Iulia (Gyulafehérvár), one of the oldest churches in Transylvania. Czerwinsk1.jpg 154 The Abbey church in Czerwińsk nad Wisłą, Poland. Lebeny-churche1.jpg 154 Lébény, it has a romanesque family financed/Hungarian clan church from the 12th century. Sé Velha de Coimbra.jpg 154 Main facade of the Old Cathedral of Coimbra, Portugal. ] [ Church towers ] Towers were an important feature of Romanesque churches and a great number of them are still standing. They take a variety of forms: square, circular and octagonal, and are positioned differently in relation to the church building in different countries. In northern France, two large towers, such as those at Caen, were to become an integral part of the facade of any large abbey or cathedral. In central and southern France this is more variable and large churches may have one tower or a central tower. Large churches of Spain and Portugal usually have two towers. Many abbeys of France, such as that at Cluny, had many towers of varied forms. This is also common in Germany, where the apses were sometimes framed with circular towers and the crossing surmounted by an octagonal tower as at Worms Cathedral. Large paired towers of square plan could also occur on the transept ends, such as those at Tournai Cathedral in Belgium. In Germany, where four towers frequently occur, they often have spires that may be four or eight sided, or the distinctive Rhenish helm shape seen on the cathedrals of Limburg or Speyer. It is also common to see bell or onion-shaped spires of the Baroque period surmounting Romanesque towers in central and Eastern Europe. In England, for large abbeys and cathedral buildings, three towers were favoured, with the central tower being the tallest. This was often not achieved, through the slow process of the building stages, and in many cases the upper parts of the tower were not completed until centuries later as at Durham and Lincoln. Large Norman towers exist at the cathedrals of Durham, Exeter, Southwell, Norwich and Tewkesbury Abbey. { F.H. Crossley, The English Abbey, Batsford, (1962) } Such towers were often topped during the late Medieval period with a Gothic spire of wooden construction covered with lead, copper or shingles. In the case of Norwich Cathedral, the huge, ornate, 12th century crossing-tower received a 15th century masonry spire rising to a height of 320 feet and remaining to this day. In Italy towers are almost always free standing and the position is often dictated by the landform of the site, rather than aesthetics. This is the case in nearly all Italian churches both large and small, except in Sicily where a number of churches were founded by the Norman rulers and are more French in appearance. As a general rule, large Romanesque towers are square with corner buttresses of low profile, rising without diminishing through the various stages. Towers are usually marked into clearly defined stages by horizontal courses. As the towers rise, the number and size of openings increases as can be seen on the right tower of the transept of Tournai Cathedral where two narrow slits in the fourth level from the top becomes a single window, then two windows, then three windows at the uppermost level. This sort of arrangement is particularly noticeable on the towers of Italian churches, which are usually built of brick and may have no other ornament. Two fine examples occur at Lucca, at the church of San Frediano and at the &apos;&apos;Duomo&apos;&apos;. It is also seen in Spain. In Italy there are a number of large free-standing towers that are circular, the most famous of these being the Leaning Tower of Pisa. In other countries where circular towers occur, such as Germany, they are usually paired and often flank an apse. Circular towers are uncommon in England, but occur throughout the Early Medieval period in Ireland. Polygonal towers were often used on crossings and occur in France, Germany, Italy and Spain such as that of the Old Cathedral, Salamanca, which is covered by a dome supported on a ribbed vault. Smaller churches sometimes had bell-gable s instead of towers, a feature which, according to some authors, is characteristic of the simplicity of much architecture in the Romanesque style. [ http://www.elripolles.com/que-vols-fer/turisme-cultural/romanic/romanic-de-la-vall-de-camprodon/7.html Romànic de la Vall de Camprodon Elripolles.com 2010-03-09 2011-06-11 ] [ center horizontal center Towers San Frediano, Lucca, Italy - tower.JPG 170 The tower of the Basilica of San Frediano, Lucca, has openings that graduate in number, typical of Italian Romanesque campanile Les tours de l&apos;église abbatiale à Plankstetten en automne.JPG 170 Paired towers such as those of Plankstetten Abbey, Bavaria, are a typical feature of German church architecture. Abbaye de Cluny, 2010 crop.jpg Cluny 165 The octagon al crossing tower of the Abbey church at Cluny influenced the building of other polygonal crossing towers in France, Germany and Spain. Sunlit tower, Tewkesbury Abbey - geograph.org.uk - 1037432.jpg Tewkesbury 182 The most massive Romanesque crossing tower is that at Tewkesbury Abbey, in England, where large crossing towers are characteristic. Pisa - Campo Santo - Campanile 1 - 2005-08-08 10-15 4638.JPG 170 The Leaning Tower of Pisa with its encircling arcades is the best known (and most richly decorated) of the many circular towers found in Italy. ] [ Interiors ] [ center horizontal center Interiors Nivelles JPG00 (13).jpg 166 The interior of St Gertrude, Nivelles, Belgium, has a king post roof. San Miniato al Monte Florence Italy.jpg 150 San Miniato al Monte, Florence, has basilical form, open timber roof and decoration of polychrome marble and mosaic. Tournus 43.jpg 174 The Church of St Philibert, Tournus, has tall circular piers and is roofed with transverse arches supporting a series of barrel vaults. Vezelay-Basilique-Nef.JPG 165 Vézelay Abbey has clusters of vertical shafts rising to support transverse arches and a groin vault. The east end is Gothic. Peterborough interior 01 adjusted.jpg 168 The nave of Peterborough Cathedral is in three stages supporting a rare wooden ceiling retaining its original decoration. ] { Ely Cathedral, England, had an elaborate west front with its central tower framed by smaller towers showing transitional features, 1180s. One of the smaller towers fell. Porch, 1250s; lantern, 1390s. } [ Transitional style ] During the 12th century, features that were to become typical of Gothic architecture began to appear. It is not uncommon, for example, for a part of building that has been constructed over a lengthy period extending into the 12th century, to have very similar arcading of both semi-circular and pointed shape, or windows that are identical in height and width, but in which the later ones are pointed. This can be seen on the towers of Tournai Cathedral and on the western towers and facade at Ely Cathedral. Other variations that appear to hover between Romanesque and Gothic occur, such as the facade designed by Abbot Suger at the Abbey of Saint-Denis, which retains much that is Romanesque in its appearance, and the Facade of Laon Cathedral, which, despite its Gothic form, has round arches. { Wim Swaan, Gothic Cathedrals } { Laon Cathedral, 1225, maintains rounded arches and arcading in the Romanesque manner. } [ Romanesque influence ] Paris and its surrounding area were quick to adopt the Gothic style of Abbot Suger Abbey of Saint-Denis in the 12th century but other parts of France were slower to take it up, and provincial churches continued to be built in the heavy manner and rubble stone of the Romanesque, even when the openings were treated with the fashionable pointed arch. In England, the Romanesque groundplan, which in that country commonly had a very long nave, continued to affect the style of building of cathedrals and those large abbey churches which were also to become cathedrals in the 16th century. Despite the fact that English cathedrals were rebuilt in many stages, substantial areas of Norman building can be seen in many of them, particularly in the nave arcades. In the case of Winchester Cathedral, the Gothic arches were literally carved out of the existent Norman piers. In Italy, although many churches such as Florence Cathedral and Santa Maria Novella were built in the Gothic style, sturdy columns with capitals of a modified Corinthian form continued to be used. The pointed vault was utilised where convenient, but it is commonly interspersed with semicircular arches and vaults wherever they conveniently fit. The facades of Gothic churches in Italy are not always easily distinguishable from the Romanesque. Germany was not quick to adopt the Gothic style, and when it did so, often the buildings were modelled very directly upon French cathedrals, as Cologne Cathedral was modelled on Amiens. The smaller churches and abbeys continued to be constructed in a more provincial Romanesque manner, the date only being registered by the pointed window openings. [ Decoration ] [ Architectural embellishment ] Arcading is the single most significant decorative feature of Romanesque architecture. It occurs in a variety of forms, from the Lombard band that is a row of small arches that appear to support a roofline or course, to shallow blind arcading that is often a feature of English architecture and is seen in great variety at Ely Cathedral, to the open dwarf gallery, first used at Speyer Cathedral and widely adopted in Italy as seen on both Pisa Cathedral and its famous Leaning Tower. Arcades could be used to great effect, both externally and internally, as exemplified by the church of Santa Maria della Pieve, in Arezzo. { Canterbury Cathedral has overlapping arches forming points, a common decorative feature of Romanesque architecture in England. } [ Architectural sculpture ] The Romanesque period produced a profusion of sculptural ornamentation. This most frequently took a purely geometric form and was particularly applied to mouldings, both straight courses and the curved moldings of arches. In La Madeleine, Vezelay, for example, the polychrome ribs of the vault are all edged with narrow filets of pierced stone. Similar decoration occurs around the arches of the nave and along the horizontal course separating arcade and clerestory. Combined with the pierced carving of the capitals, this gives a delicacy and refinement to the interior. In England, such decoration could be discrete, as at Hereford and Peterborough cathedrals, or have a sense of massive energy as at Durham where the diagonal ribs of the vaults are all outlined with chevron s, the mouldings of the nave arcade are carved with several layers of the same and the huge columns are deeply incised with a variety of geometric patterns creating an impression of directional movement. These features combine to create one of the richest and most dynamic interiors of the Romanesque period. { Alec Clifton-Taylor says &quot; With the Cathedral of Durham we reach the incomparable masterpiece of Romanesque architecture not only in England but anywhere. &quot; } { Lincoln Cathedral are formal chevron ornament, tongue-poking monsters, vines and figures, and symmetrical motifs in the } { Byzantine style. } Although much sculptural ornament was sometimes applied to the interiors of churches, the focus of such decoration was generally the west front, and in particular, the portals. Chevrons and other geometric ornaments, referred to by 19th century writers as &quot; barbaric ornament &quot; are most frequently found on the mouldings of the central door. Stylized foliage often appears, sometimes deeply carved and curling outward after the manner of the acanthus leaves on Corinthian capitals, but also carved in shallow relief and spiral patterns, imitating the intricacies of manuscript illuminations. In general, the style of ornament was more classical in Italy, such as that seen around the door of San Giusto in Lucca, and more &quot; barbaric &quot; in England, Germany and Scandinavia, such as that seen at Speyer Cathedral. France produced a great range of ornament, with particularly fine interwoven and spiralling vines in the &quot; manuscript &quot; style occurring at Saint-Sernin, Toulouse. [ Figurative sculpture ] [ Romanesque art ] { Vézelay Abbey, } { Burgundy, France, 1130s, has much decorative spiral detail in the draperies. } With the fall of the Roman Empire, the tradition of carving large works in stone and sculpting figures in bronze died out. The best-known surviving large sculptural work of Proto-Romanesque Europe is the life-size wooden Crucifix commissioned by Archbishop Gero of Cologne in about 960–65. { See details at } { Cologne Cathedral. } During the 11th and 12th centuries, figurative sculpture flourished in a distinctly Romanesque style that can be recognised across Europe, although the most spectacular sculptural projects are concentrated in South-Western France, Northern Spain and Italy. Major figurative decoration occurs particularly around the portals of cathedrals and churches, ornamenting the tympanum, lintels, jambs and central posts. The tympanum is typically decorated with the imagery of Christ in Majesty with the symbols of the Four Evangelists, drawn directly from the gilt covers of medieval Gospel Book s. This style of doorway occurs in many places and continued into the Gothic period. A rare survival in England is that of the &quot; Prior&apos;s Door &quot; at Ely Cathedral. In France, many have survived, with impressive examples at Saint-Pierre, Moissac, Souillac, [ Howe Jeffery Romanesque Architecture (slides) A digital archive of architecture Boston College http://www.bc.edu/bc_org/avp/cas/fnart/arch/souillac.html 2007-09-28 ] and La Madaleine, Vézelay – all daughter houses of Cluny, with extensive other sculpture remaining in cloisters and other buildings. Nearby, Autun Cathedral has a Last Judgement of great rarity in that it has uniquely been signed by its creator Giselbertus (who was perhaps the patron rather than the sculptor). { Seu Vella cathedral in } { Lleida, } { Spain, showing spiral and paired motifs. } It is a feature of Romanesque art, both in manuscript illumination and sculptural decoration, that figures are contorted to fit the space that they occupy. Among the many examples that exist, one of the finest is the figure of the Prophet Jeremiah from the pillar of the portal of the Abbey of Saint-Pierre, Moissac, France, from about 1130. A significant motif of Romanesque design is the spiral, a form applied to both plant motifs and drapery in Romanesque sculpture. An outstanding example of its use in drapery is that of the central figure of Christ at La Madaleine, Vezelay. Many of the smaller sculptural works, particularly capitals, are Biblical in subject and include scenes of Creation and the Fall of Man, episodes from the life of Christ and those Old Testament scenes that prefigure his Death and Resurrection, such as Jonah and the Whale and Daniel in the Lions&apos; Den. Many Nativity scenes occur, the theme of the Three Kings being particularly popular. The cloisters of Santo Domingo de Silos Abbey in Northern Spain, and Moissac are fine examples surviving complete. [ Murals ] { Master of Taüll, now in } { MNAC in } { Barcelona. } The large wall surfaces and plain, curving vaults of the Romanesque period lent themselves to mural decoration. Unfortunately, many of these early wall paintings have been destroyed by damp or the walls have been replastered and painted over. In England, France and the Netherlands such pictures were systematically destroyed in bouts of Reformation iconoclasm. In other countries they have suffered from war, neglect and changing fashion. A classic scheme for the full painted decoration of a church, derived from earlier examples often in mosaic, had, as its focal point in the semi-dome of the apse, Christ in Majesty or Christ the Redeemer enthroned within a mandorla and framed by the four winged beasts, symbols of the Four Evangelists, comparing directly with examples from the gilt covers or the illuminations of Gospel Book s of the period. If the Virgin Mary was the dedicatee of the church, she might replace Christ here. On the apse walls below would be saints and apostles, perhaps including narrative scenes, for example of the saint to whom the church was dedicated. On the sanctuary arch were figures of apostles, prophets or the twenty-four &quot; elders of the Apocalypse &quot;, looking in towards a bust of Christ, or his symbol the Lamb, at the top of the arch. The north wall of the nave would contain narrative scenes from the Old Testament, and the south wall from the New Testament. On the rear west wall would be a Last Judgement, with an enthroned and judging Christ at the top. { James Hall, A History of Ideas and Images in Italian Art, p154, 1983, John Murray, London, ISBN 0-7195-3971-4 } { San Isidoro in } { León, Spain. } One of the most intact schemes to exist is that at Saint-Savin-sur-Gartempe in France. The long barrel vault of the nave provides an excellent surface for fresco, and is decorated with scenes of the Old Testament, showing the Creation, the Fall of Man and other stories including a lively depiction of Noah&apos;s Ark complete with a fearsome figurehead and numerous windows through with can be seen the Noah and his family on the upper deck, birds on the middle deck, while on the lower are the pairs of animals. Another scene shows with great vigour the swamping of Pharaoh&apos;s army by the Red Sea. The scheme extends to other parts of the church, with the martyrdom of the local saints shown in the crypt, and Apocalypse in the narthex and Christ in Majesty. The range of colours employed is limited to light blue-green, yellow ochre, reddish brown and black. Similar paintings exist in Serbia, Spain, Germany, Italy and elsewhere in France. Stained glass, the Prophet Daniel from Augsburg Cathedral, late 11th century. [ Stained glass ] The oldest-known fragments of medieval pictorial stained glass appear to date from the 10th century. The earliest intact figures are five prophet windows at Augsburg, dating from the late 11th century. The figures, though stiff and formalised, demonstrate considerable proficiency in design, both pictorially and in the functional use of the glass, indicating that their maker was well accustomed to the medium. At Canterbury and Chartres Cathedrals, a number of panels of the 12th century have survived, including, at Canterbury, a figure of Adam digging, and another of his son Seth from a series of Ancestors of Christ. Adam represents a highly naturalistic and lively portrayal, while in the figure of Seth, the robes have been used to great decorative effect, similar to the best stone carving of the period. Most of the magnificent stained glass of France, including the famous windows of Chartres, date from the 13th century. Far fewer large windows remain intact from the 12th century. One such is the Crucifixion of Poitiers, a remarkable composition that rises through three stages, the lowest with a quatrefoil depicting the Martyrdom of St Peter, the largest central stage dominated by the crucifixion and the upper stage showing the Ascension of Christ in a mandorla. The figure of the crucified Christ is already showing the Gothic curve. The window is described by George Seddon as being of &quot; unforgettable beauty &quot;. { George Seddon in Lee, Seddon and Stephens, Stained Glass } [ Romanesque castles, houses and other buildings ] [ Romanesque secular and domestic architecture ] The Romanesque period was a time of great development in the design and construction of defensive architecture. After churches and the monastic buildings with which they are often associated, castles are the most numerous type of building of the period. While most are in ruins through the action of war and politics, others, like William the Conqueror&apos;s White Tower within the Tower of London have remained almost intact. In some regions, particularly Germany, large palace s were built for rulers and bishops. Local lords built great hall s in the countryside, while rich merchants built grand town house s. In Italy, city councils constructed town hall s, while wealthy cities of Northern Europe protected their trading interests with warehouse s and commercial premises. All over Europe, dwellers of the town and country built houses to live in, some of which, sturdily constructed in stone, have remained to this day with sufficient of their form and details intact to give a picture of the style of domestic architecture that was in fashion at the time. Examples of all these types of buildings can be found scattered across Europe, sometimes as isolated survivals like the two merchants&apos; houses on opposite sides of Steep Hill in Lincoln, England, and sometimes giving form to a whole medieval city like San Gimignano in Tuscany, Italy. These buildings are the subject of a separate article. [ center horizontal center Secular and domestic architecture London Tower (1).JPG 210 A huge square tower of grey stone is seen beyond fortifications on the edge of a river. The Tower of London, (1078). William the Conqueror built the central White Tower as his stronghold and residence. Great Hall, Oakham Castle - geograph.org.uk - 92787.jpg 210 A tidy building like a large barn, of red brick with long sloping roofs, dormer windows and a low arched doorway. The Great Hall of Oakham Castle, England, once part of the fortified manor of a Norman baron. Krak des chevaliers15(js).jpg 241 An enormous castle with encircling walls, on a rise in barren country with distant mountains. Crusader castle, Krak des Chevaliers, Syria, was mainly constructed in this period, with the outer walls being later. San Gimignano.JPG 210 View of a small town on a hilltop surrounded by trees and vineyards. There are eight tall square towers rising from among the densely packed houses. Many towns, such as San Gimignano, were enclosed with walls, causing crowding and the building of tower houses. ] [ Romanesque Revival ] [ Romanesque Revival architecture ] During the 19th century, when Gothic Revival architecture was fashionable, buildings were occasionally designed in the Romanesque style. There are a number of Romanesque Revival churches, dating from as early as the 1830s and continuing into the 20th century where the massive and &quot; brutal &quot; quality of the Romanesque style was appreciated and designed in brick. { UCLA, inspired by The } { Basilica of Sant&apos;Ambrogio in } { Milan, Italy, depicted above. } The Natural History Museum, London designed by Alfred Waterhouse, 1879, on the other hand, is a Romanesque revival building that makes full use of the decorative potential of Romanesque arcading and architectural sculpture. The Romanesque appearance has been achieved while freely adapting an overall style to suit the function of the building. The columns of the foyer, for example, give an impression of incised geometric design similar to those of Durham Cathedral. However, the sources of the incised patterns are the trunks of palms, cycads and tropical tree ferns. The animal motifs, of which there are many, include rare and exotic species. The type of modern buildings for which the Romanesque style was most frequently adapted was the warehouse, where a lack of large windows and an appearance of great strength and stability were desirable features. These buildings, generally of brick, frequently have flattened buttresses rising to wide arches at the upper levels after the manner of some Italian Romanesque facades. This style was adapted to suit commercial buildings by opening the spaces between the arches into large windows, the brick walls becoming a shell to a building that was essentially of modern steel-frame construction, the architect Henry Hobson Richardson giving his name to the style, Richardsonian Romanesque. Good examples of the style are Marshall Fields store, Chicago by H.H.Richardson, 1885, and the Chadwick Lead Works in Boston USA by William Preston, 1887. The style also lent itself to the building of cloth mills, steelworks and powerstations. [ Notes and references ] [ 35em ] [ Sources ] V.I. Atroshenko and Judith Collins, The Origins of the Romanesque, Lund Humphries, London, 1985, ISBN 0-85331-487-X Rolf Toman, Romanesque: Architecture, Sculpture, Painting, Könemann, (1997), ISBN 3-89508-447-6 Banister Fletcher, A History of Architecture on the Comparative method (2001). Elsevier Science &amp; Technology. ISBN 0-7506-2267-9. Helen Gardner; Fred S. Kleiner, Christin J. Mamiya, Gardner&apos;s Art through the Ages. Thomson Wadsworth, (2004) ISBN 0-15-505090-7. George Holmes, editor, The Oxford Illustrated History of Medieval Europe, Oxford University Press, (1992) ISBN 0-19-820073-0 René Huyghe, Larousse Encyclopedia of Byzantine and Medieval Art, Paul Hamlyn, (1958) François Ischer, Building the Great Cathedrals. Harry N. Abrams, (1998). ISBN 0-8109-4017-5. Nikolaus Pevsner, An Outline of European Architecture. Pelican Books (1964) John Beckwith, Early Medieval Art, Thames and Hudson, (1964) Peter Kidson, The Medieval World&apos;&apos;, Paul Hamlyn, (1967) T. Francis Bumpus,, The Cathedrals and Churches of Belgium, T. Werner Laurie. (1928) Alec Clifton-Taylor, The Cathedrals of England, Thames and Hudson (1967) John Harvey, English Cathedrals, Batsford (1961). Trewin Copplestone, World Architecture, and Illustrated History&apos;&apos;, Paul Hamlyn, (1963) [ See also ] [ Romanesque architecture ] List of Romanesque architecture Regional characteristics of Romanesque architecture Romanesque secular and domestic architecture Romanesque art Romanesque sculpture [ External links ] [ Romanesque ] { St-Sernin basilica, } { Toulouse, France: elevation of the east end (1080–1120). } Corpus of Romanesque Sculpture in Britain and Ireland Overview of French Romanesque art French Romanesque art through 300 places (fr)(es)(en)(it) Romanesque Churches in Southern Burgundy Italian, French and Spanish Romanesque art (it) (fr) (es) (en) Spanish and Zamora´s Romanesque art, easy navigation{es} Spanish Romanesque art{es} Círculo Románico - Visigothic, Mozarabic and Romanesque art in Europe Romanesque Churches in Portugal The Nine Romanesque Churches of the Vall de Boi - Pyrenees {en} Satan in the Groin - exhibitionist carvings on mediæval churches An illustrated article by Peter Hubert on the cusped arch Corrèze Illustrated history (French) The Encyclopedia of Romanesque Art in Spain {es}: a work in progress Saint-Trophime Digital Media Archive (creative commons-licensed HD documentation) on the Romanesque Church of St. Trophime, using data from a World Monuments Fund / CyArk research partnership Cerisy-la-Forêt abbey, a masterwork of French Norman architecture Category:Medieval architecture Category:Architectural styles Category:Medieval art Category:Roman Catholic Church architecture * [ it ] ar:عمارة رومانسكية be:Раманскі стыль be-x-old:Раманскі стыль bg:Романска архитектура ca:Art romànic cs:Románská architektura cy:Pensaernïaeth Romanesg da:Romansk stil de:Romanik es:Arquitectura románica eo:Romaniko eu:Arkitektura erromaniko fa:معماری رومی‌وار fr:Architecture romane gl:Arquitectura románica ko:로마네스크 건축 id:Arsitektur Romanesque it:Architettura romanica he:אדריכלות רומנסקית ka:რომანული არქიტექტურა kk:Роман стилі sw:Mtindo wa Kiroma lv:Romānika lt:Romanika mk:Романескна архитектура nl:Romaanse architectuur ja:ロマネスク建築 no:Romansk arkitektur nds:Romanik pl:Architektura romańska pt:Arquitetura românica ro:Romanic ru:Романская архитектура fi:Romaaninen tyyli sv:Romansk arkitektur ta:ரோமனெஸ்க் கட்டிடக்கலை th:สถาปัตยกรรมโรมาเนสก์ tr:Romanesk mimari uk:Романський стиль vi:Kiến trúc Roman zh:罗曼式建筑