Guru Hargobind depicted on a mid-nineteenth century miniature. Guru Hargobind Sahib, ( [ ਗੁਰੂ ਹਰਿ ਗੋਬਿੰਦ ਸਾਹਿਬ ] [ ɡʊru həɾɡobɪnd sɑhɪb ] ) also Saccha Badshah ( [ pa ਸੱਚਾ ਪਾਦਸ਼ਾਹ ] &quot; True Emperor &quot; ) (19 June 1595–2 March 1644) was the sixth of the Sikh gurus and became Guru on 25 May 1606 following in the footsteps of his father Guru Arjan Dev. He was not, perhaps, more than eleven at his father&apos;s execution. [ A History Of The Sikhs Joseph Davey Cunningham 1853 John Murray,London ] Before ascension, he nominated Guru Har Rai, his grandson as the next Guru of the Sikhs. From the very beginning he was the deadly enemy of the Mughal Empire. [ Muslim Rule In India V. D. Mahajan 1970 S. Chand, New Delhi, p.223 ] [ Early years ] He put on two swords: one indicated his spiritual authority and the other his temporal authority. He built the Akal Takht, the Throne of the Almighty. Guru Hargobind ji excelled in matters of state and his Darbar (Court) was noted for its splendour. The arming and training of some of his devoted followers began, the Guru came to possess seven hundred horses and his Risaldari (army) grew to three hundred horsemen and sixty gunners in the due course of time. Additionally, five hundred men from the Majha area of the Punjab were recruited as infantry. Guru Hargobind built a fortress at Amritsar called Lohgarh “Fortress of steel”. He had his own flag and war-drum which was beaten twice a day. [ Personality ] The Guru was a brilliant martial artist (shastarvidya), { http://www.shastarvidiya.org/history14.jsp } and avid hunter. { Grewal, J.S. Sikh History from Persian Sources: Translations of Major Texts ISBN 978-8185229171 &quot; Many person became his disciples. Nanak believed in the Oneness of God and in the way that it is asserted in Muhammadan theology. He also believed in transmigration of souls. Holding wine and pork to be unlawful, he had [himself] abandoned eating meat. He decreed avoidance of causing harm to animals. It was after his time that meat-eating spread amongst his followers. Arjan Mal, who was one of his lineal successors, found this to be evil. He prohibited people from eating meat, saying, &apos;This is not in accordance with Nanak’s wishes&apos;. Later, Hargobind, son of Arjan Mal, ate meat and took to hunting. Most of their [the Gurus] followers adopted his practice. } Hargobind encouraged people to maintain physical fitness and keep their bodies ready for physical combat. His policy was sometimes at odds with more established members such as Baba Budha Ji. [ Relations with Jahangir and wars with Mughals ] The reasons for Guru Hargobind to arm his followers were many. Both externally and internally the situation was changing and the policy of the Guru had to be adjusted to a new environment. The organisational development of Sikhism had mostly taken place during the tolerant days of Akbar who had never interfered with it; he had, on the contrary, even helped the Gurus in various ways. But the execution of Guru Arjan at the hands of Jahangir and imprisonment of Hargobind definitely showed that sterner days were ahead and the policy of mere peaceful organisation no longer sufficed. Guru Arjan had foreseen and Guru Hargobind also clearly saw that it would no longer be possible to protect the Sikh community without the aid of arms. He had a stable of eight hundred horses; three hundred mounted followers were constantly in attendance upon him, and a guard of fifty six matchlock -men secured his safety in person. Jahangir could not tolerate the armed policy of Hargobind and consequently imprisoned him, and ultimately released him. The relations between the Guru and Jahangir became friendly and continued to remain so. During the reign of Shah Jahan, relations became bitter again, for Shah Jahan was intolerant. He destroyed the Sikh baoli at Lahore. The quarrels which originally started over hawks or horses between Mughal officials and the Sikhs subsequently led to risings on a large scale and were responsible for the deaths of thousands of persons on both sides. Battles were fought at Amritsar, Kartarpur and elsewhere. He defeated the Imperial troops near Amritsar. The Guru was again attacked by a provincial detachment, but the attackers were routed and their leaders slain. Hargobind grasped a sword and marched with his devoted soldiers among the troops of the empire, or boldly led them to oppose and overcome the provincial governor s or personal enemies. [ Cunningham Joseph Davey A History Of The Sikhs 1853 John Murray London 53 ] A childhood friend of Hargobind, Painde Khan,whose mother had been the nurse of the Guru, had become his enemy. The cause given, in some accounts, was a valuable hawk of a follower of the Guru which was taken by Khan and when asked for, was resented by him. Other accounts note Khan&apos;s vanity and his pride. This opportunity was used by Mughal officials, who saw Hargobind as an ever-present danger. Painde Khan was appointed leader of the provincial troops and marched upon the Guru. Hargobind was attacked, but the warlike apostle slew the friend of his youth with his own hand and proved again a victor. [ Cunningham Joseph Davey A History Of The Sikhs 1853 John Murray London 55 ] There is an incident narrated by both Sikh and Muslim native accounts. During one of the battles, Hargobind was rushed upon angrily by a soldier. He not only warded off the blow but struck and laid dead the soldier at his feet. &quot; Not so, but thus is the sword used &quot;; an observation from which the influence is drawn that &quot; Hargobind struck not in anger, but deliberately and to give instruction; for the function of the Guru is to teach &quot;. Hargobind had many difficulties of a similar kind, but his Sikhs always rallied around him. Guru Hargobind breathed his last, peacefully, at Kiratpur Rupnagar, Punjab on 2 March 1644. [ Effects ] During the era of Hargobind, the Sikhs increased greatly in number, and the fiscal policy of Guru Arjan and the armed system of Guru Hargobind had already formed the Sikhs into a kind of separate entity within the empire. The Guru was not unconscious of his latent influence but in his private life never forgot his genuine character, and always styled himself Nanak, in deference to the firm belief of his Sikhs, that the soul of their great teacher was alive in each of his successors. [ Cunningham Joseph Davey A History Of The Sikhs 1853 John Murray London 57 ] Hargobind had no regard for idol worship. One of his followers cut off the nose of an idol; on complaints from various neighboring chiefs, he summoned the Sikh to his presence; the culprit denied the act, but added, ironically, that if the idol bore witness against him, he would accept punishment willingly. &quot; O fool &quot; replied the chiefs, &quot; how will the idol speak &quot;. Replied the Sikh &quot; if he can&apos;t save his head, then how will he avail you. &quot; [ Summary ] The following is a summary of the main highlights of Guru Hargobind&apos;s life: Transformed the Sikh fraternity by introducing martial arts and weapons for the defence of the masses following his father&apos;s martyrdom. Militarised the Sikh movement  – carried two swords of Miri and Piri. Built the Akal Takht in 1608  – which is now one of five Takhts (Seats of Power) of the Sikhs. Founded the city of Kiratpur in District Jalandhar, Punjab. He was imprisoned in the fort of Gwalior for one year and on release insisted that 52 fellow prisoners be freed as well. To mark this occasion the Sikhs celebrate Bandi Chhor Divas. The first Guru to engage in warfare. Fought four battles against the Mughal rulers. The city Hargobindpur, in Majha region of Punjab, is named after him, which he won over from Mughals after defeating them in a battle. [ References ] [ Further reading ] Dr Harjinder Singh Dilgeer (1980), The Akal Takht, Sikh University Press Dr Harjinder Singh Dilgeer (2005), Sikh Twareekh Vich Akal Takht Sahib Da Role, Sikh University Press Dr Harjinder Singh Dilgeer (2011), Akal Takht Sahib (Concept &amp; Role), Sikh University Press Dr Harjinder Singh Dilgeer (2008), Sikh Twareekh (5 volumes), Sikh University Press. [ External links ] The Sikh Web Site The Sikh History Web Site [ Guru Arjan Dev (15 April 1563  – 30 May 1606) Guru Hargobind Guru Har Rai (26 February 1630  – 30 May 1661) ] [ Gobind, Har 1595/1590 Guru Di Wadali (near Amritsar) 1644 ] Category:Sikh warriors Category:Sikh gurus Category:Indian martial artists Category:1595 births Category:1644 deaths Category:Punjabi people az:Har Qobind de:Har Gobind fa:گورو هر گوبیند fr:Gurû Hargobind hi:गुरु हरगोबिन्द सिंह mr:गुरू हरगोबिंद nl:Goeroe Hargobind ja:グル・ハルゴービンド nn:Guru Har Gobind pa:ਗੁਰੂ ਹਰਿਗੋਬਿੰਦ ਜੀ ru:Гуру Хар Гобинд