[ organizations of the same name outside Canada Engineers Without Borders ] [ February 2010 ] { 15-20 } { &gt; 50 000 } { EWB Canada } Engineers Without Borders Canada ( French : Ingénieurs sans frontières Canada), abbreviated EWB or ISF, is a non-governmental organization devoted to international development. Founded in 2000 by George Roter and Parker Mitchell, engineering graduates from the University of Waterloo, it is a registered Canadian charity focused on finding solutions to extreme poverty, specifically in rural Africa. The group has chapters at universities across Canada, and regional chapters aimed at professionals in several major cities. EWB Canada has no direct affiliations with similarly named organizations in the rest of the world, although it does collaborate with them from time to time. [ Mission ] Throughout much of EWB&apos;s early history, its mission was &quot; to promote human development through access to technology. &quot; [ November 2009 ] In January 2009, the organization abandoned the mission statement by burning a copy of it on stage at its national conference. This was done in order to allow EWB to continue doing international development in the best way possible, without being tied down to a specific focus on technology. [ November 2009 ] Since then, EWB has replaced its mission statement with four outcome areas: Supporting rural African capacity, Advocating for improved Canadian policies toward Africa, Engaging Canadians to contribute and connect to Africa, and Helping the engineering profession serve global society. [ Operations ] [ In Canada ] Rally at Queen&apos;s University celebrating the launch of their chapter initiative in 2009 In Canada, EWB Canada engages in numerous educational and public outreach activities in Canada including educating high school students about international development issues via the School Outreach program, enhancing curricula at some universities by developing assignments or courses for engineering students, and informing the Canadian public on global development issues. EWB Canada also works in advocacy campaigns aimed convincing the Canadian government to change policies and laws concerning international development issues. This is done through letter writing and meeting with politicians, among other means. Unknown to many, EWB Canada played a large role in the Canadian Live 8 concert in 2005 and has won numerous awards both nationally and internationally. EWB Canada is a young, rapidly growing student-driven organization based on university chapters across Canada, with a national office in Toronto to support the university chapters and to co-ordinate and train overseas volunteers. As of January 2009 there are 26 university chapters, 7 professional chapters and more than 35,000 members nationwide. Paid staff is kept to a minimum in the organization, in order to run the organization as efficiently as possible; all positions outside the national office are volunteer. The members are primarily engineering students, although a number of non-engineering students are active members and have volunteered overseas. There is an annual EWB Canada national conference every year in late January which is currently the largest international development conference in Canada. Its location varies from year to year depending on the chapter hosting it. [ Overseas ] [ November 2009 ] EWB works overseas (primarily in sub-Saharan Africa) with local NGOs and, occasionally, government departments (for example, the Ghanaian Ministry of Food and Agriculture) to help increase access to technology at the local level. The focus is on access to technology largely through local capacity-building rather than on technologies themselves. Chapters are able to send overseas volunteers for four month work terms through the Junior Fellowship in International Development Program. Short term volunteers, or Junior Fellows, are student members returning to their chapter following their time overseas. Four months is considered a short term placement and the greatest impact is the overseas volunteers&apos; contributions upon their return to their chapter in Canada - they return with a wide range of experiences and lessons that can be passed on to other members and the public at large. Long-term overseas volunteers go on placements lasting one to three years. These are often university graduates that were involved with an EWB Canada university chapter. Knowledge and experience in international development, leadership skills and open-mindedness are considered much more important than just technical skills. The goal of these placements is not to alleviate poverty alone, but also to build capacity among the local non-governmental organization partners and community at large. For this reason all overseas projects are done in collaboration with a local NGO partner who is encouraged to take ownership of various projects and ultimately have no need EWB Canada&apos;s help and input. [ Partnerships ] As discussed above, EWB Canada works with local NGOs and government departments in order to carry out its overseas work. It also partners with other NGOs from time to time on projects of mutual interest, including the Canadian iteration of the Make Poverty History campaign. [ Relationships with other EWB organizations ] EWB Canada is legally and structurally separate from all other &quot; Engineers Without Borders &quot; organizations, although it assisted in the launch of EWB UK (which uses EWB Canada&apos;s lightbulb logo), and also maintains close relationships with EWB Australia, ISF Spain, ISF Italy, and Engineers for a Sustainable World in the U.S. Like the other aforementioned groups, EWB Canada is not part of the EWB International network, which was started by EWB-USA and includes a rival group in the province of Quebec, Ingénieurs sans frontières Québec. The Canadian organization says that while it does attend some of EWB-I&apos;s meetings and occasionally collaborates with its member groups, active participation in that network would be difficult since the EWB-I groups do not share a &quot; common strategy and culture &quot; with each other, let alone with EWB Canada. In particular, the Canadian group is a strong critic of EWB-USA&apos;s focus on short-term development projects run by each chapter, arguing that &quot; locally driven, locally appropriate change is the only sustainable change that will reduce people’s vulnerabilities and thus, reduce the need for short term, humanitarian type projects. &quot; { EWB Canada Member FAQ. Retrieved 2010-01-22. } [ Governance ] George Roter has served as sole chief executive officer of the organization since January 1, 2011. Previously, Roter was co-CEO along with fellow co-founder Parker Mitchell, who remains a member of EWB&apos;s board of directors. [ Board of directors ] EWB&apos;s board consists of the following directors, in a mixture of appointed and elected positions. { EWB Canada - Board of Directors. Retrieved 2011-02-04. (Page does not yet reflect expiration of Jane Polak Scowcroft&apos;s term as an elected director.) } Don Thurston (Chair) - President, Selkirk Portfolio Management Mary Lynne Forestell (Treasurer) - Senior Director of IT Finance, Bell Canada Tristan Allan - engineering student, University of Alberta (elected director) Courtney Edwards - engineering graduate student, Carleton University (elected director) Louis Dorval - Director of Special Projects, Meltwater Group Jacques Gérin - former chair, International Institute for Sustainable Development Parker Mitchell - co-founder, EWB Canada Grégoire Poirier Richer - account manager, General Electric (elected director) George Roter - CEO, EWB Canada Brian Schofield - retired director, McKinsey &amp; Company Shayne Smith - CEO, Wardrop Engineering Inc. [ Advisory board ] In addition to its board of directors, EWB Canada has an advisory board consisting of: { EWB Canada - Advisory Board. Retrieved 2011-02-04 } Zafer Achi - Director, McKinsey &amp; Company J. Edward Brockhouse - Founder, Brockhouse and Cooper Robert Chambers - Research Associate, Institute of Development Studies, University of Sussex Dato&apos; Ir. Lee Yee Cheong - Past President, World Federation of Engineering Organisations Rupert Duchesne - President and CEO, Aeroplan Sakiko Fukuda-Parr - Past Director, Human Development Report, United Nations Development Programme David Johnston - Governor-General of Canada, former President of University of Waterloo Donald Johnston - Secretary General, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development Vernon Lobo - Managing Director, Mosaic Venture Partners Maureen O’Neil - President, Canadian Health Services Research Foundation James Orbinski - Past President, Médecins Sans Frontières Patrick Pichette - CFO, Google Betty Plewes - Past CEO, Canadian Council for International Co-operation John Ralston Saul - essayist and novelist Scott Rutherford - management consultant, previously of McKinsey &amp; Company Ian Smillie - international development consultant and author Frances Stewart - Director, Development Studies, University of Oxford [ See also ] Without Borders Engineers Without Borders [ References ] [ External links ] Engineers Without Borders Canada - Official Site myEWB - Member discussion site Canada Category:Appropriate technology organizations Category:Development charities Category:Engineering organizations Category:Charities based in Canada Category:Organizations established in 2000