[ March 2009 ] [ 5.75 S 132.73 E type:isle ] { Kai Besar, } { Kai Kecil } { 1438 } { Indonesia } { Province } { Maluku } right The Kai Islands (also Kei Islands) of Indonesia are in the south-eastern part of the Maluku Islands, in Maluku Province. [ Geography ] Inhabitants called the islands Nuhu Evav (Evav Islands) or Tanat Evav (Evav Land), but known as Kei for people from neighbourhood islands. &quot; Kai &quot; is actually a Dutch colonial era spelling, still persisting in books based on old resources. The islands are on the edge of the Banda Sea, south of the Bird&apos;s Head Peninsula of New Guinea, west of the Aru Islands, and northeast of the Tanimbar Islands. The small group called Tayandu Islands (also Tahayad) is just west. The Kei islands are made up of numerous islands, including Kai Besar or Nuhu Yuut or Nusteen (Great Kei) Kai Kecil or Nuhu Roa or Nusyanat (Little Kei) Tanimbar Kei or Tnebar Evav Kei Dulah or Du Dulah Laut or Du Roa Kuur Taam Tayandu Islands (Tahayad) groups. The Kei Islands&apos; total land area is 1438  km² (555 sq mi). Kei Besar is mountainous and densely forested.Kei Kecil has the biggest population, and is flat. Actually it is a lifted coral reef.The capital is the town of Tual, mostly inhabited by Muslims. Nearby Langgur is the center for Christians.Kei is famous for the beauty of its beaches, e.g. Pasir Panjang. The Kei islands are part of Wallacea, the group of Indonesian islands that are separated by deep water from both the Asia n and Australia n continental shelves, and were never linked to either continent. As a result the Kei Islands have few native mammals and are part of the Banda Sea Islands moist deciduous forests ecoregion. [ History ] Local history holds that ancestors of contemporary Kei islanders came from Bali, part of the expanding Majapahit kingdom from the western archipelago. The village of Ohoi-Ewur ( first Raja Ewab : Raja Ohoi-Ewur = Raja Tabtut) on Kei Kecil or Nuhuroa island was the first place that the Balinese royal family and the army arrived, where they stayed with the local residents. As a result, Ohoi-ewur became a seat of government, where the local law (Larvul Ngabal) – Red Blood and Balinese Spear – is developed by the initiative of the royal princess Dit Sakmas. Evidence of these ties on Kei Kecil and especially in Letvuan include an inheritance and a harbour named Bal Sorbay (Bali Surabaya) that is the place where the royals arrived. It is recognized by kai islanders that some of their ancestors also came from another places such as Sumbawa island (Sumbau), Buton (Vutun)in Sulawesi, Seram (Seran) and Gorom (Ngoran) islands in Central Moluccas, and Sultanates of Jailolo (Dalo) and Ternate (Ternat) as well. The tiny island of Tanimbarkei is not part of Tanimbar, but of the Kei Islands and inhabited by less than 1000 very traditional people. Half of the population calls themselves Hindus, but in fact are more or less practising ancestor worship. After the 1999 clashes between the Muslim and Christian population in Ambon, they also swept through Kei, but calmed quick down again with fewer victims.This islands archipelagoes depends on 22 ratshcaap or traditional local leader call Rat or Raja as king of customary law. [ Economy ] The soil on Kei Kecil is poor. Slash and Burn is still common.Fishing, Trepang. In Kei Kecil there is cultured pearl. [ Languages ] Three Austronesian languages are spoken on the Kei Islands; Keiese is the most widely spoken, in 207 villages on Kei Kecil, Kei Besar, and surrounding islands. Kurese is spoken on Kur Island and nearby Kaimeer, where Kei is used as a lingua franca. Bandanese is spoken in the villages of Banda-Eli (Wadan El) and Banda-Elat (Wadan Elat) on the west and northeastern side of Kei Besar. Banda speakers originally came from the Banda Islands, but the language is no longer spoken there. There is no native writing system for the Keiese Language. Dutch Catholic missionaries write the language using a variation of the Roman alphabet. [ Greetings ] Fel be / Fel be he : hello, how are you? Bok át / Bok bok wat: I&apos;m fine [ Musical instruments ] Kei musical instruments were:- 1) Savarngil (Flute): A small native flute from 10 to 20 centimetres (4 to 8  in) long, open at both ends and having six fingerholes placed along the pipe made of bamboo and are keyless. 2) Tiva (Drum):Single headed drums, consist of a calf skin membrane which is stretched over an enclosed space or over one of the ends of a hollow vessel. 3) Dada ( Gong ):a medium-size gong 30 to 38 centimetres (12 to 15  in) in size, with a crashing sound, have a raised boss or nipple in the centre. [ See also ] Islands of Indonesia [ External links ] Map of the Kei Islands, 6MB Info booklet about the Kei Islands in Dutch Category:Archipelagoes of Indonesia ar:جزر كاي de:Kai-Inseln et:Kai saared es:Islas Kai fr:Îles Kai gl:Illas Kai id:Kepulauan Kai it:Isole Kai nl:Kei-eilanden ja:カイ諸島 pl:Wyspy Kai sv:Kaiöarna zh:卡伊群島