[ the German chemist the operatic tenor Karl Ziegler (tenor) ] [ yes 1973 8 12 1898 11 26 ] { Mülheim, Germany } { Organic chemistry } { Aachen University of Technology } { Max Planck Institute für Kohlenforschung } { University of Marburg } { Karl von Auwers } { Ziegler-Natta catalyst } { Nobel Prize for Chemistry (1963) } Karl Waldemar Ziegler (November 26, 1898 – August 12, 1973) was a German chemist who won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1963, with Giulio Natta, for work on polymer s. The Nobel Committee recognized his &quot; excellent work on organometallic compounds [which]...led to new polymerization reactions and... paved the way for new and highly useful industrial processes &quot;. He is also known for his work involving free-radical s, many-membered rings, and organometallic compounds, as well as the development of Ziegler-Natta catalyst. One of many awards Ziegler received was the Werner von Siemens Ring in 1960 jointly with Otto Bayer and Walter Reppe, for expanding the scientific knowledge of and the technical development of new synthetic materials. [ Biography ] [ Early life and education ] Karl Ziegler was born November 26, 1898 in Helsa near Kassel, Germany and was the second son of Karl Ziegler, a Lutheran minister, and Luise Rall Ziegler. [ Sherby Louise The Who&apos;s Who of Nobel Prize Winners 1901–2000 Oryx Press Westport, CT 2002 Fourth 1-57356-414-1 ] He attended Kassel-Bettenhausen in elementary school. An introductory physics textbook first sparked Ziegler&apos;s interest in science. It drove him to perform experiments in his home and to read extensively beyond his high school curriculum. He was also introduced to many notable individuals through his father, including Emil Adolf von Behring, recognized for the diphtheria vaccine. [ Eisch John J. 1983 Karl Ziegler: Master Advocate for the Unity of Pure and Applied Research Journal of Chemical Education 60 12 1009–1014 10.1021/ed060p1009 ] His extra study and experimentation help explain why he received an award for most outstanding student in his final year at high school in Kassel, Germany. He studied at the University of Marburg and was able to omit his first two semesters of study due to his extensive background knowledge. His studies were interrupted however, as during 1918 he was deployed to the. front as a soldier to serve in World War I. [ http://www.analyticjournal.de/ak_pat_historie/ziegler_gdch/ziegler_broschuere_gdch.pdf Historical Sites of Chemistry: Karl Ziegler Haenel Matthias 8 May 2008 Booklet Max-Planck-Institute for Coal Research German 9 April 2010 ] He received his Ph.D. in 1920, studying under Karl von Auwers. His dissertation was on &quot; Studies on semibenzole and related links &quot; which led to three publications. [ Career ] Karl Ziegler possessed an eagerness for science at an early age. He progressed through schooling quickly receiving a doctorate from the University of Marburg in 1920. Soon after, he briefly lectured at the University of Marburg and the University of Frankfurt. In 1926 he became a professor at the University of Heidelberg where he spent the next ten years researching new advances in organic chemistry. [ http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/657091/Karl-Ziegler Karl Ziegler 9 April 2010 ] He investigated the stability of radicals on trivalent carbons leading him to study organometallic compounds and their application in his research. He also worked on the syntheses of multi-membered ring systems. [ nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/chemistry/laureates/1963/ziegler-bio.html Karl Ziegler:The Nobel Prize in Chemistry 1963 9 April 2010 ] In 1933 Zielger published his first major work on large ring systems, “Vielgliedrige Ringsysteme” which presented the fundamentals for the Ruggli-Ziegler dilution principle. [ Guenther Wilke 2003 Fifty Years of Ziegler Catalysts: Consequences and Development of an Invention Angewandte Chemie 42 5000–5008 10.1002anie/200330056 14595621 41 ] Max Planck Institute for Coal Research. In 1936 he became Professor and Director of the Chemical Institute (Chemisches Institut) at the University of Halle /Saale and was also a visiting lecturer at the University of Chicago. From 1943 until 1969, Ziegler was the Director of the Max Planck Institute for Coal Research (Max-Planck-Institut fur Kohlenforschung) formerly known as the Kaiser-Wilhelm Institute for Coal Research (Kaiser-Wilhelm-Institut fur Kohlenforschung) in Mülheim an der Ruhr as a successor to Franz Fischer. Karl Ziegler was credited for much of the post war resurrection of chemical research in Germany and helped in founding the German Chemical Society (Gesellschaft Deutscher Chemiker) in 1949. He served as president for five years. He was also the president of the German Society for Petroleum Science and Coal Chemistry (Deutsche Gesellschaft für Mineralölwissenschaft und Kohlechemie), which was from 1954 to 1957. [ Personal life ] In 1922, Ziegler married Maria Kurtz. [ Bawn C.E.H. Nov. 1975 Karl Ziegler Biographical Memoirs of Fellows of the Royal Society The Royal Society 21 569 769696 ] They had two children, Erhart and Marianna. His daughter, Dr. Marianna Ziegler Witte was a doctor of medicine and married a chief physical of a children&apos;s hospital (at that time) in the Ruhr. His son, Dr. Erhart Ziegler, became a physicist and patent attorney. In addition to his children, Karl Ziegler has five grandchildren by his daughter, and five by his son. [ Nobel Lectures, Chemistry 1963–1970 Elsevier Publishing Company Amsterdam 1972 ] At least one of his grandchildren, Cordula Witte, attended his Nobel Prize reception as there is a picture of the two of them happily dancing. Ziegler enjoyed traveling around the world with his family, especially on cruises. He even charted special cruises and airplanes for eclipse viewing. It was during a 1972 eclipse-viewing cruise with his grandson that Karl Ziegler became ill. He died a year later. Ziegler and his wife were great lovers of the arts, particularly paintings. Karl and Maria would present each other with paintings for birthdays, Christmases, and anniversaries. They amassed a large collection of paintings, not necessarily of one particular period, but of paintings they enjoyed. Maria, being an avid gardener, particularly enjoyed flower paintings by Emil Nolde, Erich Heckel, Oskar Kokoschka, and Karl Schmidt-Rottluff. Karl enjoyed pictures of the places that he and his wife called home, including pictures of Halle and the Ruhr valley. Forty-two images from their shared collection were incorporated into a foundation, bequeathed to the Mülheim Ziegler Art Museum. [ http://www.karlzieglerschule.de Karl Ziegler Schule German 19 March 2010 ] As a man of many discoveries, Karl Ziegler was also a man of many patents. As a result of his patent agreement with the Max Planck Institute, Ziegler was a wealthy man. With part of this wealth, he set up the Ziegler Fund with some 40 million deutsche marks to support the institute&apos;s research. Another namesake is the Karl-Ziegler-Schule, an urban high school that was founded on December 4, 1974, renaming a previously existing school. The school is located in Mülheim, Germany. Karl Ziegler died in Mülheim, Germany August 12, 1973. [ Scientific advancements ] Throughout his life, Ziegler was a zealous advocate for the necessary indivisibility of all kinds of research. Because of this, his scientific achievements range from the fundamental to the most practical, and his research spans a wide range of topics within the field of chemistry. As a young professor, Ziegler posed the question: what factors contribute to the dissociation of carbon-carbon bonds in substituted ethane derivatives? This question was to lead Ziegler on to a study of free radicals, organometallics, ring compounds, and, finally, polymerization processes. [ Free radical compounds ] Example of three tri-valent carbon free radicals. 1. 1,2,4,5-tetraphenylallyl. 2. pentaphenylcyclopentadienyl. 3. triphenylmethyl. While still a doctoral student at University of Marburg, Ziegler published his first major article which showed how halochromic (R 3 C + Z - ) salts could be made from carbinols. Previous work had left the impression that halochromic salts or free radicals (R3C•) required R to be aromatic. He was encouraged to try to synthesize similarly substituted free radicals, and successfully prepared 1,2,4,5-tetraphenylallyl in 1923 and pentaphenylcyclopentadienyl in 1925. These two compounds were much more stable than previous tri-valent carbon free radicals, such as triphenylmethyl. His interest in the stability of tri-valent carbon free-radical compounds brought him to publish the first of many publications in which he sought to identify the steric and electronic factors responsible for the dissociation of hexa-substituted ethane derivatives. [ Bonnesen Peter V. Nobel Laureates in Chemistry, 1901–1992 Laylin K. James Chemical Heritage Foundation Washington, D.D. 1993 3 449–455 0-8412-2690-3 ] [ Many-membered ring compounds ] Ziegler’s work with many-membered ring compounds also utilized the reactive nature of alkali metal compounds. He used strong bases such as the lithium and sodium salts of amines, to accomplish the cyclization of long-chain hydrocarbon s possessing terminal cyano groups. The initially formed ring compound was then converted to the desired macrocyclic ketone product. Ziegler’s synthetic method, which included running reactions at high dilution to favor the intramolecular cyclization over competing intermolecular reactions, resulted in yields superior to those of existing procedures (Laylin): he was able to prepare large-ringed alicyclic ketones, C 14 to C 33, in yields of 60–80%. An outstanding instance of this synthesis was the preparation of muscone, the odiferous principle of animal musk by Lavoslav Ružička. [ Oesper Ralph E. September 1948 Karl Ziegler Journal of Chemical Education 25 9 510–511 10.1021/ed025p510 ] Ziegler and co-workers published the first of their series of papers on the preparation of large ring systems in 1933. For his work in this area and in free-radical chemistry he was awarded the Liebig Memorial Medal in 1935. [ Organometallic compounds ] Ziegler’s work with free radicals led him to the organo compounds of the alkali metal s. He discovered that ether scission opened a new method of preparing sodium and potassium alkyls, and found that these compounds could easily be converted to the hexa-substituted ethane derivatives. The nature of the substituent could be easily and systematically altered using this synthetic route by simply changing the identity of the ether starting material. [ Lithium alkyls ] Later, in 1930, He directly synthesized lithium alkyls and aryls from metallic lithium and halogenated hydrocarbons. 4Li+2RX – 2RLi This convenient synthesis spurred numerous studies of RLi reagents by others, and now organolithium reagent s are one of the most versatile and valuable tools of the synthetic organic chemist. Ziegler’s own research on lithium alkyls and olefins was to lead directly to his discovery of a new polymerization technique some 20 years later. [ Living polymerization ] In 1927, he found that when the olefin stilbene was added to an ethyl ether solution of phenylisopropyl potassium, an abrupt color change from red to yellow took place. He had just observed the first addition of an organoalkali metal compound across a carbon-carbon double bond. Further work showed that he could successively add more and more of the olefinic hydrocarbon butadiene to a solution of phenylisopropyl potassium and obtain a long-chain hydrocarbon with the reactive organopotassium end still intact. Oligomer s such as these were the forerunners of the so-called “ living polymers ” [ Polyethylene ] [ polyethylene ] Since Ziegler was working at the Max Planck Institute for Coal Research, ethylene was readily available as a byproduct from coal gas. Because of this cheap feedstock of ethylene and the relevance to the coal industry, Ziegler began experimenting with ethylene, and made it a goal to synthesize polyethylene of high molecular weight. His attempts were thwarted because a competing elimination reaction kept occurring causing an anomalous result: instead of ethylene being converted into a mixture of higher aluminum alkyls, its dimer, 1-butene, was almost the only product. It was reasoned that a contaminant must have been present to cause this unexpected elimination reaction, and the cause was eventually determined to be traces of nickel salts. Ziegler realized the significance of this finding; if a nickel salt could have such a dramatic influence on the course of an ethylene-aluminum alkyl reaction, then perhaps another metal might delay the elimination reaction. Ziegler and his student H. Breil found that salts of chromium, zirconium, and especially titanium did not promote the R2AlH-elimination but, instead, enormously accelerated the “growth” reaction. Simply passing ethylene, at atmospheric pressure, into a catalytic amount of TiCl3 and Et2AlCl dissolved in a higher alkane led to the prompt deposition of polyethylene. Ziegler was able to obtain high molecular weight polyethylene (MW &gt; 30,000) and, most importantly, to do so at low ethylene pressures. The Ziegler group suddenly had a polymerization procedure for ethylene superior to all existing processes. [ Ziegler-Natta catalyst ] [ Ziegler-Natta catalyst ] In 1952, Ziegler disclosed his catalyst to the Montecatini Company in Italy, for which Giulio Natta was acting as a consultant. Natta denoted this class of catalysts as “Ziegler catalysts” and became extremely interested in their ability and potential to stereoregularly polymerize α-olefins such as propene. Ziegler, meanwhile concentrated mainly on the large-scale production of polyethylene and copolymers of ethylene and propylene. Soon the scientific community was informed of his discovery. Highly crystal line and stereoregular polymers that previously could not be prepared became synthetically feasible. For their work on the controlled polymerization of hydrocarbons through the use of these novel organometallic catalysts, Karl Ziegler and Giulio Natta shared the 1963 Nobel Prize in Chemistry. [ Awards ] Karl Ziegler received many awards and honors. The following highlights many of the most significant awards. [ http://www2.royalsociety.org/DServe/dserve.exe?dsqIni%3DDserve.ini%26amp%3BdsqApp%3DArchive%26amp%3BdsqCmd%3DShow.tcl%26amp%3BdsqDb%3DPersons%26amp%3BdsqPos%3D0%26amp%3BdsqSearch%3D%28Surname%3D%27ziegler%27%29 Library and Archive Catalogue Royal Society 2 November 2010 ] Liebig-Denkmünze medal (1935); This medal was awarded by the present day German Chemical Society and is given to a German chemist for their outstanding accomplishments and creativity. Ziegler received the award because of his work in the synthesis of multi-membered ring systems and stable tri-valent carbon radicals. Carl Duisberg Plakette (1953); This award is given for outstanding service to the promotion of chemistry from the German Chemical Society. Lavoisier Medal (1955); This award is given by the French Chemical Society to scientists in various disciplines of chemistry. Carl Engler Medal (1958); This award is given by the German Society of Petroleum Science and Coal Chemicals, of which he was the president in earlier years. Werner von Siemens Ring (1960); This ring is awarded by the Werner von Siemens Foundation and is considered the highest German award for individuals who by their performance and skills opened up new technological paths. Nobel Prize in Chemistry (1963); &quot; [His] excellent work on organometallic compounds has unexpectedly led to new polymerization reactions and thus paved the way for new and highly useful industrial processes. &quot; The Swinburne Medal of the Plastics Institute, London (1964); This award recognizes an individual who has made a significant advancement to the science, engineering or technology of plastics. Grand Federal Cross of Merit (Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany)(1969); Ziegler was given this award for his work in the area of Science and Technology. Foreign Member of the Royal Society (1971) [ See also ] Ziegler-Natta catalyst List of Nobel laureates in Chemistry [ References ] [ 35em ] [ External links ] Nobel biography [ Ziegler, Karl Waldemar German chemist who won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1963 November 26, 1898 Helsa near Kassel, Germany 1973-8-12 Mülheim, Germany ] Category:1898 births Category:1973 deaths Category:People from Hesse-Nassau Category:Nobel laureates in Chemistry Category:German chemists Category:University of Marburg alumni Category:Polymer scientists and engineers Category:German Nobel laureates Category:Werner von Siemens Ring laureates Category:Grand Crosses with Star and Sash of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany Category:Foreign Members of the Royal Society ar:كارل تزيغلر bg:Карл Циглер ca:Karl Ziegler cs:Karl Ziegler de:Karl Ziegler (Chemiker) es:Karl Ziegler eu:Karl Ziegler fa:کارل زیگلر fr:Karl Ziegler gd:Karl Ziegler gl:Karl Ziegler io:Karl Ziegler id:Karl Ziegler it:Karl Ziegler sw:Karl Ziegler la:Carolus Ziegler hu:Karl Ziegler mr:कार्ल झीगलर nl:Karl Ziegler ja:カール・ツィーグラー no:Karl Ziegler oc:Karl Ziegler pnb:کارل زیگلر pl:Karl Ziegler pt:Karl Ziegler ro:Karl Ziegler ru:Циглер, Карл Вальдемар sq:Karl Ziegler sk:Karl Waldemar Ziegler fi:Karl Ziegler sv:Karl Ziegler tr:Karl Ziegler uk:Карл Циглер vi:Karl Ziegler yo:Karl Ziegler zh:卡尔·齐格勒