{ 1910s. } A branding iron is a tool which uses the process of pressing a heated metal shape against an object or livestock with the intention of leaving a mark. From the branding of livestock to prove ownership to the branding of woodcrafts to prove craftsmanship, branding irons are used in many different ways. [ History ] The history of branding is very much tied to the history of using animals as a commodity. The act of marking livestock with fire-heated marks to identify ownership begins in ancient times, with use dating back to the ancient Egypt ians. [ http://brandingirons.com/index.html The Evolution of Branding Branding Irons Unlimited ] The process continued throughout the ages, with Romans using the process to brand slave s as well. { The branding of slaves. The Review of Arts, Literature, Philosophy and the Humanities } In the English lexicon, the word &quot; brand &quot; originally meant anything hot or burning, such as a fire-brand, a burning stick. By the European Middle Ages it commonly identified the process of burning a mark into a stock animals with thick hides, such as cattle, so as to identify ownership under animus revertendi. The practice became particularly widespread in nations with large cattle grazing regions, such as Spain. These European customs were imported to the Americas and were further refined by the vaquero tradition in what today is the southwestern United States and northern Mexico. In the American West, a branding iron consisted of an iron rod with a simple symbol or mark which cowboy s heated in a fire. After the branding iron turned red-hot, the cowboy pressed the branding iron against the hide of the cow. The unique brand meant that cattle owned by multiple ranch es could then graze freely together on the open range. Cowboys could then separate the cattle at roundup time for driving to market. From the Americas, many cattle branding traditions and techniques spread to other countries such Australia, where a distinct set of traditions and techniques developed [ Types of branding irons ] Branding Irons come in a variety of styles, designed primarily by their method of heating. [ Fire-heated ] The traditional fire-heated method is still in use today. While they require longer lengths of time to heat, are inconsistent in temperature and all around inferior to more advanced forms of branding, they are inexpensive to produce and purchase, which all but guarantees their continued use. Fire-heated branding irons are used to brand wood, steak, leather, livestock and plastics. [ Electric ] Electric branding irons utilize an electric heating element to heat a branding iron to the desired heat in much the same way an electric toaster or space heater works. Electric branding irons come in many variations from irons designed to brand cattle, irons designed to mark wood and leather and models designed to be placed inside a drill press for the purposes of manufacturing. An Electric Branding Iron&apos;s temperature can be controlled by increasing or decreasing the flow of electricity. [ Propane ] Propane Branding Irons use a continuous flow of propane to heat the iron head. They are commonly used where electricity is not available. Utilizing the flow of propane, the temperature can be adjusted for varying branding environments. A commercially built branding iron heater fired with L.P. gas is a common method of heating several branding irons at once. [ http://www.caes.uga.edu/Publications/pubDetail.cfm?pk_id%3D6051 Ronald E. Silcox Lawton Stewart Beef Herd Management in Georgia B  883, CAES Publications, College of Agricultural &amp; Environmental Sciences, The University of Georgia January 4, 2009 ] [ Freeze-branding ] In contrast to traditional hot-iron branding, freeze branding uses a branding iron that has been chilled with a coolant such as dry ice or liquid nitrogen. Rather than burning a scar into the animal, a freeze brand damages the pigment-producing hair cells, causing the animal&apos;s hair to grow white where the brand has been applied. To apply a freeze brand, the hair coat of the animal is shaved so that the bare skin is exposed, then the frozen iron is applied to the bare area for a period of time that varies with both the species of animal and the color of its hair coat: Shorter times are used on dark-colored animals, simply causing the hair follicles to lose all color and regrow as white hairs. Longer times are needed on animals with white hair coats, as the brand is applied long enough to permanently stop the hair from growing in the branded area and only skin remains. [ http://www.caes.uga.edu/publications/pubDetail.cfm?pk_ID%3D7636 Dyer Ted G. Freeze Branding Cattle C  904, CAES Publications, College of Agricultural &amp; Environmental Sciences, The University of Georgia June 14, 2011 To improve efficiency, cattle producers should place a high priority on identifying individual cattle and maintaining accurate records. ] [ Popular use ] [ Livestock ] Livestock branding is perhaps the most prevalent use of a branding iron. Modern use includes gas heating, the traditional fire-heated method, an iron heated by electricity (electric cattle branding iron) or an iron super cooled by dry ice (freeze branding iron). Cattle, horses and other livestock are commonly branded today for the same reason they were in Ancient times, to prove ownership. [ Wood branding ] Woodworkers will often use Electric or Fire-Heated Branding Irons to leave their maker&apos;s mark or company logo. Timber pallets and other timber export packaging is often marked in this way in accordance with ISPM 15 to indicate that the timber has been treated to prevent it carrying pests. [ Steak ] Steak branding irons are used commonly by barbecue enthusiasts and professional chefs to leave a mark indicating how well done a steak is or to identify the chef or grill master. [ Leather ] Branding Irons are used often by makers of horse tack often in place of a steel leather stamp to indicate craftsmanship. [ See also ] Cattle race Horse markings Human branding Ranch Squeeze chute Tattoo [ References ] [ Branding irons ] Category:Horse management Category:Animal identification Category:Woodworking Category:Barbecue cs:Označování zvířat de:Brandzeichen fr:Marquage au fer ka:დაღი lt:Įdagas ru:Тавро sv:Brännmärkning