Representation of consciousness from the seventeenth century. Consciousness is a term that refers to the relationship between the mind and the world with which it interacts. [ Robert van Gulick 2004 Consciousness Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/consciousness/ ] It has been defined as: subjectivity, awareness, the ability to experience or to feel, wakefulness, having a sense of self hood, and the executive control system of the mind. [ The Psychology of Consciousness Farthing G 1992 Prentice Hall 978-0-13-728668-3 ] Despite the difficulty in definition, many philosophers believe that there is a broadly shared underlying intuition about what consciousness is. [ John Searle 2005 Honderich T The Oxford companion to philosophy Consciousness Oxford University Press 978-0-19-926479-7 ] As Max Velmans and Susan Schneider wrote in The Blackwell Companion to Consciousness: &quot; Anything that we are aware of at a given moment forms part of our consciousness, making conscious experience at once the most familiar and most mysterious aspect of our lives. &quot; [ Susan Schneider and Max Velmans 2008 Introduction Max Velmans, Susan Schneider The Blackwell Companion to Consciousness Wiley 978-0-470-75145-9 ] Philosophers since the time of Descartes and Locke have struggled to comprehend the nature of consciousness and pin down its essential properties. Issues of concern in the philosophy of consciousness include whether the concept is fundamentally valid; whether consciousness can ever be explained mechanistically; whether non-human consciousness exists and if so how it can be recognized; how consciousness relates to language; and whether it may ever be possible for computer s or robot s to be conscious. Perhaps the thorniest issue is whether consciousness can be understood in a way that does not require a dualistic distinction between mental and physical states or properties. In recent years, consciousness has become a significant topic of research in psychology and neuroscience. The primary focus is on understanding what it means biologically and psychologically for information to be present in consciousness—that is, on determining the neural and psychological correlates of consciousness. The majority of experimental studies assess consciousness by asking human subjects for a verbal report of their experiences (e.g., &quot; tell me if you notice anything when I do this &quot; ). Issues of interest include phenomena such as subliminal perception, blindsight, denial of impairment, and altered states of consciousness produced by psychoactive drugs or spiritual or meditative techniques. In medicine, consciousness is assessed by observing a patient&apos;s arousal and responsiveness, and can be seen as a continuum of states ranging from full alertness and comprehension, through disorientation, delirium, loss of meaningful communication, and finally loss of movement in response to painful stimuli. [ Güven Güzeldere The Nature of Consciousness: Philosophical debates 1997 Ned Block, Owen Flanagan, Güven Güzeldere 1–67 Cambridge, MA MIT Press ] Issues of practical concern include how the presence of consciousness can be assessed in severely ill, comatose, or anesthetized people, and how to treat conditions in which consciousness is impaired or disrupted. [ Late recovery from the minimally conscious state: ethical and policy implications J. J. Fins, N. D. Schiff, and K. M. Foley Neurology 2007 68 304–307 17242341 ] [ Etymology and early history ] { John Locke, British philosopher active in the 17th century } The origin of the modern concept of consciousness is often attributed to John Locke &apos;s Essay Concerning Human Understanding, published in 1690. [ An Essay Concerning Human Understanding (Chapter XXVII) Locke John University of Adelaide Australia http://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/l/locke/john/l81u/B2.27.html August 20, 2010 ] Locke defined consciousness as &quot; the perception of what passes in a man&apos;s own mind. &quot; [ http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/133274/consciousness Science &amp; Technology: consciousness Encyclopædia Britannica August 20, 2010 ] His essay influenced the 18th century view of consciousness, and his definition appeared in Samuel Johnson &apos;s celebrated Dictionary (1755). [ A Dictionary of the English Language Samuel Johnson Knapton 1756 http://books.google.com/books?id%3DfcVEAAAAcAAJ ] The earliest English language uses of &quot; conscious &quot; and &quot; consciousness &quot; date back, however, to the 1500s. The English word &quot; conscious &quot; originally derived from the Latin conscius (con- &quot; together &quot; + scire &quot; to know &quot; ), but the Latin word did not have the same meaning as our word—it meant knowing with, in other words having joint or common knowledge with another. [ Studies in words C. S. Lewis 1990 Cambridge University Press Ch. 8: Conscience and conscious 978-0-521-39831-2 ] There were, however, many occurrences in Latin writings of the phrase conscius sibi, which translates literally as &quot; knowing with oneself &quot;, or in other words sharing knowledge with oneself about something. This phrase had the figurative meaning of knowing that one knows, as the modern English word &quot; conscious &quot; does. In its earliest uses in the 1500s, the English word &quot; conscious &quot; retained the meaning of the Latin conscius. For example Thomas Hobbes in Leviathan wrote: &quot; Where two, or more men, know of one and the same fact, they are said to be Conscious of it one to another. &quot; [ Leviathan: or, The Matter, Forme &amp; Power of a Commonwealth, Ecclesiasticall and Civill Thomas Hobbes University Press 1904 http://books.google.com/books?id%3D2oc6AAAAMAAJ 39 ] The Latin phrase conscius sibi, whose meaning was more closely related to the current concept of consciousness, was rendered in English as &quot; conscious to oneself &quot; or &quot; conscious unto oneself &quot;. For example, Archbishop Ussher wrote in 1613 of &quot; being so conscious unto myself of my great weakness &quot;. [ The whole works, Volume 2 James Ussher, Charles Richard Elrington 417 1613 Hodges and Smith ] Locke&apos;s definition from 1690 illustrates that a gradual shift in meaning had taken place. A related word was conscientia, which primarily means moral conscience. In the literal sense, &quot; conscientia &quot; means knowledge-with, that is, shared knowledge. The word first appears in Latin juridical texts by writers such as Cicero. [ Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics Part 7 James Hastings and John A. Selbie Kessinger Publishing 0-7661-3677-9 2003 41 ] Here, conscientia is the knowledge that a witness has of the deed of someone else. [ G. Melenaar Mnemosyne, Fourth Series 22 170–180 Brill ] René Descartes (1596–1650) is generally taken to be the first philosopher to use &quot; conscientia &quot; in a way that does not fit this traditional meaning. [ Boris Hennig Cartesian Conscientia British Journal for the History of Philosophy 2007 15 455–484 ] Descartes used &quot; conscientia &quot; the way modern speakers would use &quot; conscience. &quot; In Search after Truth he says &quot; conscience or internal testimony &quot; (conscientia vel interno testimonio). [ 205–206 Consciousness: from perception to reflection in the history of philosophy 978-1-4020-6081-6 Springer Sara Heinämaa 2007 ] [ In philosophy ] The philosophy of mind has given rise to many stances regarding consciousness. Any attempt to impose an organization on them is bound to be somewhat arbitrary. Stuart Sutherland exemplified the difficulty in the entry he wrote for the 1989 version of the Macmillan Dictionary of Psychology: [ Stuart Sutherland Macmillan Dictionary of Psychology Macmillan Consciousness 1989 978-0-333-38829-7 ] Most writers on the philosophy of consciousness have been concerned to defend a particular point of view, and have organized their material accordingly. For surveys, the most common approach is to follow a historical path by associating stances with the philosophers who are most strongly associated with them, for example Descartes, Locke, Kant, etc. The main alternative, followed in the present article, is to organize philosophical stances according to the answers they give to a set of basic questions about the nature and status of consciousness. [ Is consciousness a valid concept? ] Philosophers and non-philosophers differ in their intuitions about what consciousness is. [ Justin Sytsma and Edouard Machery Two conceptions of subjective experience Philosophical Studies 2010 151 299–327 10.1007/s11098-009-9439-x ] While most people have a strong intuition for the existence of what they refer to as consciousness, [ May 2012 ] skeptics argue that this intuition is false, either because the concept of consciousness is intrinsically incoherent, or because our intuitions about it are based in illusions. Gilbert Ryle, for example, argued that traditional understanding of consciousness depends on a Cartesian dualist outlook that improperly distinguishes between mind and body, or between mind and world. He proposed that we speak not of minds, bodies, and the world, but of individuals, or persons, acting in the world. Thus, by speaking of &apos;consciousness&apos; we end up misleading ourselves by thinking that there is any sort of thing as consciousness separated from behavioral and linguistic understandings. [ The Concept of Mind Gilbert Ryle University of Chicago Press 1949 156–163 978-0-226-73296-1 ] More generally, many philosophers and scientists have been unhappy about the difficulty of producing a definition that does not involve circularity or fuzziness. [ Is it a single thing? ] Many philosophers have argued that consciousness is a unitary concept that is understood intuitively by the majority of people in spite of the difficulty in defining it. [ Michael V. Antony Is consciousnessambiguous? Journal of Consciousness Studies 8 2001 19–44 ] Others, though, have argued that the level of disagreement about the meaning of the word indicates that it either means different things to different people, or else is an umbrella term encompassing a variety of distinct meanings with no simple element in common. [ Max Velmans How to define consciousness—and how not to define consciousness Journal of Consciousness Studies 2009 16 139–156 ] Ned Block proposed a distinction between two types of consciousness that he called phenomenal (P-consciousness) and access (A-consciousness). [ The Nature of Consciousness: Philosophical Debates N. Block, O. Flanagan, G. Guzeldere On a confusion about a function of consciousness Ned Block 375–415 1998 978-0-262-52210-6 MIT Press http://cogprints.org/231/1/199712004.html ] P-consciousness, according to Block, is simply raw experience: it is moving, colored forms, sounds, sensations, emotions and feelings with our bodies and responses at the center. These experiences, considered independently of any impact on behavior, are called qualia. A-consciousness, on the other hand, is the phenomenon whereby information in our minds is accessible for verbal report, reasoning, and the control of behavior. So, when we perceive, information about what we perceive is access conscious; when we introspect, information about our thoughts is access conscious; when we remember, information about the past is access conscious, and so on. Although some philosophers, such as Daniel Dennett, have disputed the validity of this distinction, [ Invalid length. ] others have broadly accepted it. David Chalmers has argued that A-consciousness can in principle be understood in mechanistic terms, but that understanding P-consciousness is much more challenging: he calls this the hard problem of consciousness. [ http://www.imprint.co.uk/chalmers.html Facing up to the problem of consciousness David Chalmers Journal of Consciousness Studies 2 1995 200–219 ] Some philosophers believe that Block&apos;s two types of consciousness are not the end of the story. William Lycan, for example, argued in his book Consciousness and Experience that at least eight clearly distinct types of consciousness can be identified (organism consciousness; control consciousness; consciousness of; state/event consciousness; reportability; introspective consciousness; subjective consciousness; self-consciousness)—and that even this list omits several more obscure forms. [ William Lycan Consciousness and Experience 1–4 1996 MIT Press 978-0-262-12197-2 ] [ How does it relate to the physical world? ] [ Mind–body problem ] { René Descartes. Inputs are passed by the sensory organs to the } { pineal gland and from there to the immaterial spirit. } The first influential philosopher to discuss this question specifically was Descartes, and the answer he gave is known as Cartesian dualism. Descartes proposed that consciousness resides within an immaterial domain he called res cogitans (the realm of thought), in contrast to the domain of material things which he called res extensa (the realm of extension). [ Philosophy of Man: selected readings Dy, Jr. Manuel B. Goodwill Trading Co. 2001 971-12-0245-X 97 ] He suggested that the interaction between these two domains occurs inside the brain, perhaps in a small midline structure called the pineal gland. [ Descartes and the Pineal Gland Stanford University November 5, 2008 http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/pineal-gland/ 2010-08-22 ] Although it is widely accepted that Descartes explained the problem cogently, few later philosophers have been happy with his solution, and his ideas about the pineal gland have especially been ridiculed. [ Descartes and the pineal gland Gert-Jan Lokhorst Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2011 Edition) Edward N. Zalta http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2011/entries/pineal-gland/ ] Alternative solutions, however, have been very diverse. They can be divided broadly into two categories: dualist solutions that maintain Descartes&apos;s rigid distinction between the realm of consciousness and the realm of matter but give different answers for how the two realms relate to each other; and monist solutions that maintain that there is really only one realm of being, of which consciousness and matter are both aspects. Each of these categories itself contains numerous variants. The two main types of dualism are substance dualism (which holds that the mind is formed of a distinct type of substance not governed by the laws of physics) and property dualism (which holds that the laws of physics are universally valid but cannot be used to explain the mind). The three main types of monism are physicalism (which holds that the mind consists of matter organized in a particular way), idealism (which holds that only thought truly exists and matter is merely an illusion), and neutral monism (which holds that both mind and matter are aspects of a distinct essence that is itself identical to neither of them). There are also, however, a large number of idiosyncratic theories that cannot cleanly be assigned to any of these camps. [ William Jaworski Philosophy of Mind: A Comprehensive Introduction John Wiley and Sons 2011 978-1-4443-3367-1 5–11 ] Since the dawn of Newtonian science with its vision of simple mechanical principles governing the entire universe, some philosophers have been tempted by the idea that consciousness could be explained in purely physical terms. The first influential writer to propose such an idea explicitly was Julien Offray de La Mettrie, in his book Man a Machine (L&apos;homme machine). His arguments, however, were very abstract. [ Ann Thomson Julien Offray de La Mettrie Machine man and other writings Cambridge University Press 1996 978-0-521-47849-6 ] The most influential modern physical theories of consciousness are based on psychology and neuroscience. Theories proposed by neuroscientists such as Gerald Edelman [ Bright Air, Brilliant Fire: On the Matter of the Mind Gerald Edelman Basic Books 1993 978-0-465-00764-6 ] and Antonio Damasio, [ Antonio Damasio 1999 The Feeling of What Happens: Body and Emotion in the Making of Consciousness New York Harcourt Press 978-0-15-601075-7 ] and by philosophers such as Daniel Dennett, [ Daniel Dennett 1991 Consciousness Explained Boston Little &amp; Company 978-0-316-18066-5 ] seek to explain consciousness in terms of neural events occurring within the brain. Many other neuroscientists, such as Christof Koch, [ Christof Koch 2004 The Quest for Consciousness Englewood CO Roberts &amp; Company 978-0-9747077-0-9 ] have explored the neural basis of consciousness without attempting to frame all-encompassing global theories. At the same time, computer scientists working in the field of Artificial Intelligence have pursued the goal of creating digital computer programs that can simulate or embody consciousness. [ Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach Stuart J. Russell, Peter Norvig Ch. 26: Philosophical foundations Prentice Hall 2010 978-0-13-604259-4 ] A few theoretical physicists have argued that classical physics is intrinsically incapable of explaining the holistic aspects of consciousness, but that quantum theory provides the missing ingredients. Several theorists have therefore proposed quantum mind (QM) theories of consciousness. [ Quantum Approaches to Consciousness Stanford University December 25, 2011 http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/qt-consciousness/ ] Notable theories falling into this category include the Holonomic brain theory of Karl Pribram and David Bohm, and the Orch-OR theory formulated by Stuart Hameroff and Roger Penrose. Some of these QM theories offer descriptions of phenomenal consciousness, as well as QM interpretations of access consciousness. None of the quantum mechanical theories has been confirmed by experiment. Recent papers by Guerreshi, G., Cia, J., Popescu, S. and Briegel, H. [ 10.1103/PhysRevE.82.021921 Cai J. Popescu S. Briegel H. Persistent dynamic entanglement from classical motion: How bio-molecular machines can generate non-trivial quantum states Physical Review E 82 021921 ] could falsify proposals such those of Hameroff which rely on quantum entanglement in protein. At the present time many scientists and philosophers consider the arguments for an important role of quantum phenomena to be unconvincing. [ John Searle 1997 The Mystery of Consciousness The New York Review of Books 53–88 978-0-940322-06-6 ] [ Why do people believe that other people are conscious? ] Many philosophers consider experience to be the essence of consciousness, and believe that experience can only fully be known from the inside, subjectively. But if consciousness is subjective and not visible from the outside, why do the vast majority of people believe that other people are conscious, but rocks and trees are not? [ Knobe J 2008 Can a Robot, an Insect or God Be Aware? Scientific American: Mind http://www.scientificamerican.com/article.cfm?id%3Dcan-a-robot-an-insect-or ] This is called the problem of other minds. [ Alec Hyslop Other Minds 1995 Springer 978-0-7923-3245-9 5–14 ] It is particularly acute for people who believe in the possibility of philosophical zombie s, that is, people who think it is possible in principle to have an entity that is physically indistinguishable from a human being and behaves like a human being in every way but nevertheless lacks consciousness. [ Robert Kirk Zombies Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2009 Edition) Edward N. Zalta http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2009/entries/zombies ] The most commonly given answer is that we attribute consciousness to other people because we see that they resemble us in appearance and behavior: we reason that if they look like us and act like us, they must be like us in other ways, including having experiences of the sort that we do. There are, however, a variety of problems with that explanation. For one thing, it seems to violate the principle of parsimony, by postulating an invisible entity that is not necessary to explain what we observe. [ Alec Hyslop The analogical inference to other minds Other Minds 1995 Springer 978-0-7923-3245-9 41–70 ] Some philosophers, such as Daniel Dennett in an essay titled The Unimagined Preposterousness of Zombies, argue that people who give this explanation do not really understand what they are saying. [ Daniel Dennett The unimagined preposterousness of zombies Journal of Consciousness Studies 2 1995 322–325 ] More broadly, philosophers who do not accept the possibility of zombies generally believe that consciousness is reflected in behavior (including verbal behavior), and that we attribute consciousness on the basis of behavior. A more straightforward way of saying this is that we attribute experiences to people because of what they can do, including the fact that they can tell us about their experiences. [ Stevan Harnad Why and how we are not zombies Journal of Consciousness Studies 1995 1 164–167 ] For further explanation for why people believe other people have consciousness look at Peter Carruthers Phenomenal Consciousness. He goes through explanations about theory of mind and higher order thought. His explanations provide more complex answers through our various mental strategies in theory of mind that lead us to believe we are conscious as well as other people while trees and rocks are not conscious. [ How can we know whether non-human animals are conscious? ] The topic of animal consciousness is beset by a number of difficulties. It poses the problem of other minds in an especially severe form, because animals, lacking the ability to express human language, cannot tell us about their experiences. [ Colin Allen Animal consciousness Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2011 Edition) Edward N. Zalta http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2011/entries/consciousness-animal/ ] Also, it is difficult to reason objectively about the question, because a denial that an animal is conscious is often taken to imply that it does not feel, its life has no value, and that harming it is not morally wrong. Descartes, for example, has sometimes been blamed for mistreatment of animals due to the fact that he believed only humans have a non-physical mind. [ Peter Carruthers Sympathy and subjectivity Australasian Journal of Philosophy 1999 77 465–482 ] Most people have a strong intuition that some animals, such as dogs, are conscious, while others, such as insects, are not; but the sources of this intuition are not obvious. Philosophers who consider subjective experience the essence of consciousness also generally believe, as a correlate, that the existence and nature of animal consciousness can never rigorously be known. Thomas Nagel spelled out this point of view in an influential essay titled What Is it Like to Be a Bat?. He said that an organism is conscious &quot; if and only if there is something that it is like to be that organism — something it is like for the organism &quot;; and he argued that no matter how much we know about an animal&apos;s brain and behavior, we can never really put ourselves into the mind of the animal and experience its world in the way it does itself. [ Thomas Nagel Mortal Questions Ch. 12 What is it like to be a bat? Cambridge University Press 1991 978-0-521-40676-5 ] Other thinkers, such as Douglas Hofstadter, dismiss this argument as incoherent. [ Douglas Hofstadter Reflections on What Is It Like to Be a Bat? 403–414 The Mind&apos;s I Douglas Hofstadter and Daniel Dennett Basic Books 1981 046504624 ] Several psychologists and ethologists have argued for the existence of animal consciousness by describing a range of behaviors that appear to show animals holding beliefs about things they cannot directly perceive — Donald Griffin &apos;s 2001 book Animal Minds reviews a substantial portion of the evidence. [ Animal Minds: Beyond Cognition to Consciousness Donald Griffin University of Chicago Press 2001 978-0-226-30865-4 ] [ Could a machine ever be conscious? ] The idea of an artifact made conscious is an ancient theme of mythology, appearing for example in the Greek myth of Pygmalion, who carved a statue that was magically brought to life, and in medieval Jewish stories of the Golem, a magically animated homunculus built of clay. [ Moshe Idel Golem: Jewish Magical and Mystical Traditions on the Artificial Anthropoid 1990 SUNY Press 978-0-7914-0160-6 ] { Note: In many stories the Golem was mindless, but some gave it emotions or thoughts. } However, the possibility of actually constructing a conscious machine was probably first discussed by Ada Lovelace, in a set of notes written in 1842 about the Analytical Engine invented by Charles Babbage, a precursor (never built) to modern electronic computers. Lovelace was essentially dismissive of the idea that a machine such as the Analytical Engine could think in a humanlike way. She wrote: [ Ada Lovelace Sketch of The Analytical Engine, Note G http://www.fourmilab.ch/babbage/sketch.html ] One of the most influential contributions to this question was an essay written in 1950 by pioneering computer scientist Alan Turing, titled Computing Machinery and Intelligence. Turing disavowed any interest in terminology, saying that even &quot; Can machines think? &quot; is too loaded with spurious connotations to be meaningful; but he proposed to replace all such questions with a specific operational test, which has become known as the Turing test. [ Stuart Shieber The Turing Test : Verbal Behavior as the Hallmark of Intelligence MIT Press 2004 978-0-262-69293-9 ] To pass the test a computer must be able to imitate a human well enough to fool interrogators. In his essay Turing discussed a variety of possible objections, and presented a counterargument to each of them. The Turing test is commonly cited in discussions of artificial intelligence as a proposed criterion for machine consciousness; it has provoked a great deal of philosophical debate. For example, Daniel Dennett and Douglas Hofstadter argue that anything capable of passing the Turing test is necessarily conscious, [ Daniel Dennett and Douglas Hofstadter 1985 The Mind&apos;s I Basic Books 978-0-553-34584-1 ] while David Chalmers argues that a philosophical zombie could pass the test, yet fail to be conscious. [ David Chalmers 1997 The Conscious Mind: In Search of a Fundamental Theory Oxford University Press 019511789 ] In a lively exchange over what has come to be referred to as &quot; The Chinese Room Argument &quot;, John Searle sought to refute the claim of proponents of what he calls &apos;Strong Artificial Intelligence (AI)&apos; that a computer program can be conscious, though he does agree with advocates of &quot; Weak AI &quot; that computer programs can be formatted to &quot; simulate &quot; conscious states. His own view is that consciousness has subjective, first-person causal powers by being essentially Intentional due simply to the way human brains function biologically; conscious persons can perform computations, but consciousness is not inherently computational the way computer programs are. To make a Turing machine that speaks Chinese, Searle gets in a room stocked with algorithms programmed to respond to Chinese questions, i.e., Turing machines, programmed to correctly answer in Chinese questions asked in Chinese, and he finds he&apos;s able to process the inputs to outputs perfectly without having any understanding of Chinese, nor having any idea what the questions and answers could possibly mean. And, this is all a current computer program would do. If the experiment were done in English, since Searle knows English, he would be able to take questions and give answers without any algorithms for English questions, and he would be affectively aware of what was being said and the purposes it might serve: Searle passes the Turing test of answering the questions in both languages, but he&apos;s only conscious of what he&apos;s doing when he speaks English. Another way of putting the argument is to say computational computer programs can pass the Turing test for processing the syntax of a language, but that semantics cannot be reduced to syntax in the way Strong AI advocates hoped: processing semantics is conscious and intentional because we use semantics to consciously produce meaning by what we say. [ The Chinese Room Argument http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/chinese-room ] In the literature concerning artificial intelligence (AI), Searle&apos;s essay has been second only to Turing&apos;s in the volume of debate it has generated. [ John Searle et al. Minds, brains, and programs Behavioral and Brain Sciences 1980 3 417–457 10.1017/S0140525X00005756 ] Searle himself was vague about what extra ingredients it would take to make a machine conscious: all he proposed was that what was needed was &quot; causal powers &quot; of the sort that the brain has and that computers lack. But other thinkers sympathetic to his basic argument have suggested that the necessary (though perhaps still not sufficient) extra conditions may include the ability to pass not just the verbal version of the Turing test, but the robotic version, [ Graham Oppy and David Dowe 2011 The Turing test http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2011/entries/turing-test Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2011 Edition) ] which requires grounding the robot&apos;s words in the robot&apos;s sensorimotor capacity to categorize and interact with the things in the world that its words are about, Turing-indistinguishably from a real person. Turing-scale robotics is an empirical branch of research on embodied cognition and situated cognition [ Margaret Wilson Six views of embodied cognition Psychonomic Bulletin &amp; Review 9 2002 625–636 http://philosophy.wisc.edu/shapiro/PHIL951/951articles/wilson.htm ] [ The transitivity principle ] [ section May 2012 ] One argument in the field of philosophy of consciousness deals with what it is that makes a mental state “conscious” in the sense of there being something it is like to experience that state. David Rosenthal posits the “transitivity principle” as a possible answer to this question. This principle holds that what makes a state conscious is the individual being aware of being in that state. This happens, on Rosenthal’s account, through the use of a higher-order thought that is directed on the mental state in question. Rosenthal cites several empirical paradigms in support of his theory. Blind-sight is one. This is a phenomenon that occurs in individuals with damage to the visual center of their brains. These individuals are often capable of relatively simple forms of visual awareness (like being able to spatially locate an x in a picture) but do not report anything concerning what it is like to experience these visual stimuli. Rosenthal claims that this can only be explained as a perception which the subject is not aware of experiencing. Rosenthal also cites masked-priming, in which the individual is presented a priming stimulus which is quickly replaced by a masking stimulus. The individual does not report having experienced the state even though they clearly received the visual input. Again, Rosenthal claims that this can only be an instance of a visual stimulus of which the subject is not aware, and which there is therefore nothing it is like to experience. Fred Dretske has objected to the transitivity principle on the basis that we often experience mental states that are consciously different without being aware of the conscious different. For instance, one might look at a picture of two forests. The pictures might be exactly the same except that there is one tree that is present in one picture but absent in the other. Dretske points out that what it is like to see the one forest is different from what it is like to see the other. And yet the individual looking at the pictures can easily fail to be aware that they differ at all. [ Spiritual approaches ] [ Level of consciousness (esotericism) Higher consciousness ] To most philosophers, the word &quot; consciousness &quot; connotes the relationship between the mind and the world. To writers on spiritual or religious topics, it frequently connotes the relationship between the mind and God, or the relationship between the mind and deeper truths that are thought to be more fundamental than the physical world. Krishna consciousness, for example, is a term used to mean an intimate linkage between the mind of a worshipper and the god Krishna. [ Lynne Gibson Modern World Religions: Hinduism Heinemann Educational Publishers 2002 0-435-33619-3 2–4 ] The mystical psychiatrist Richard Maurice Bucke distinguished between three types of consciousness: Simple Consciousness, awareness of the body, possessed by many animals; Self Consciousness, awareness of being aware, possessed only by humans; and Cosmic Consciousness, awareness of the life and order of the universe, possessed only by humans who are enlightened. [ Richard Maurice Bucke Cosmic Consciousness: A Study in the Evolution of the Human Mind Innes &amp; Sons 1905 http://books.google.com/books?id%3DgxRWAAAAMAAJ 1–2 ] Many more examples could be given. The most thorough account of the spiritual approach may be Ken Wilber &apos;s book The Spectrum of Consciousness, a comparison of western and eastern ways of thinking about the mind. Wilber described consciousness as a spectrum with ordinary awareness at one end, and more profound types of awareness at higher levels. [ Ken Wilber The Spectrum of Consciousness Motilal Banarsidass Publ. 2002 978-81-208-1848-4 3–16 ] [ Scientific approaches ] For many decades, consciousness as a research topic was avoided by the majority of mainstream scientists, because of a general feeling that a phenomenon defined in subjective terms could not properly be studied using objective experimental methods. [ Horst Hendriks-Jansen Catching ourselves in the act: situated activity, interactive emergence, evolution, and human thought 1996 Massachusetts Institute of Technology 114 0-262-08246-2 ] In 1975 George Mandler published an influential psychological study which distinguished between slow, serial, and limited conscious processes and fast, parallel and extensive unconscious ones. { Mandler, G. Consciousness: Respectable, useful, and probably necessary. In R.Solso (Ed.)Information processing and cognition: NJ: LEA. } Starting in the 1980s,an expanding community of neuroscientists and psychologists have associated themselves with a field called Consciousness Studies, giving rise to a stream of experimental work published in books, { Mandler, G. Consciousness recovered: Psychological functions and origins of thought. Philadelphia: John Benjamins. 2002 } journals such as Consciousness and Cognition, and methodological work published in journals such as the Journal of Consciousness Studies, along with regular conferences organized by groups such as the Association for the Scientific Study of Consciousness. [ Toward a Science of Consciousness III: The Third Tucson Discussions and Debates Stuart Hameroff, Alfred Kaszniak, David Chalmers Preface 978-0-262-58181-3 MIT Press 1999 xix–xx ] Modern scientific investigations into consciousness are based on psychological experiments (including, for example, the investigation of priming effects using subliminal stimuli ), and on case studies of alterations in consciousness produced by trauma, illness, or drugs. Broadly viewed, scientific approaches are based on two core concepts. The first identifies the content of consciousness with the experiences that are reported by human subjects; the second makes use of the concept of consciousness that has been developed by neurologists and other medical professionals who deal with patients whose behavior is impaired. In either case, the ultimate goals are to develop techniques for assessing consciousness objectively in humans as well as other animals, and to understand the neural and psychological mechanisms that underlie it. [ Measurement ] { Necker Cube, an ambiguous image } Experimental research on consciousness presents special difficulties, due to the lack of a universally accepted operational definition. In the majority of experiments that are specifically about consciousness, the subjects are human, and the criterion that is used is verbal report: in other words, subjects are asked to describe their experiences, and their descriptions are treated as observations of the contents of consciousness. [ Bernard Baars A Cognitive Theory of Consciousness 1993 Cambridge University Press 978-0-521-42743-2 15–18 ] For example, subjects who stare continuously at a Necker Cube usually report that they experience it &quot; flipping &quot; between two 3D configurations, even though the stimulus itself remains the same. [ Perception: Theory, Development, and Organization Paul Rooks and Jane Wilson 2000 Psychology Press 978-0-415-19094-7 25–26 ] The objective is to understand the relationship between the conscious awareness of stimuli (as indicated by verbal report) and the effects the stimuli have on brain activity and behavior. In several paradigms, such as the technique of response priming, the behavior of subjects is clearly influenced by stimuli for which they report no awareness. [ Thomas Schmidt and Dirk Vorberg Criteria for unconscious cognition: Three types of dissociation Perception and Psychophysics 68 2006 489–504 ] Verbal report is widely considered to be the most reliable indicator of consciousness, but it raises a number of issues. For one thing, if verbal reports are treated as observations, akin to observations in other branches of science, then the possibility arises that they may contain errors—but it is difficult to make sense of the idea that subjects could be wrong about their own experiences, and even more difficult to see how such an error could be detected. [ Quining qualia Daniel Dennett Consciousness in Modern Science A. Marcel and E. Bisiach Oxford University Press 1992 http://cogprints.org/254/ 2011-10-31 978-0-19-852237-9 ] Daniel Dennett has argued for an approach he calls heterophenomenology, which means treating verbal reports as stories that may or may not be true, but his ideas about how to do this have not been widely adopted. [ Daniel Dennett 2003 Who&apos;s on first? Heterophenomenology explained Journal of Consciousness Studies 10 19–30 ] Another issue with verbal report as a criterion is that it restricts the field of study to humans who have language: this approach cannot be used to study consciousness in other species, pre-linguistic children, or people with types of brain damage that impair language. As a third issue, philosophers who dispute the validity of the Turing test may feel that it is possible, at least in principle, for verbal report to be dissociated from consciousness entirely: a philosophical zombie may give detailed verbal reports of awareness in the absence of any genuine awareness. [ David Chalmers The Conscious Mind 1996 Ch. 3: Can consciousness be reductively explained? Oxford University Press 978-0-19-511789-9 ] Although verbal report is in practice the &quot; gold standard &quot; for ascribing consciousness, it is not the only possible criterion. [ The Boundaries of Consciousness: Neurobiology and Neuropathology Methods for studying unconscious learning Arnaud Destrebecqz and Philippe Peigneux Steven Laureys 2006 Elsevier 978-0-444-52876-6 69–80 ] In medicine, consciousness is assessed as a combination of verbal behavior, arousal, brain activity and purposeful movement. The last three of these can be used as indicators of consciousness when verbal behavior is absent. The scientific literature regarding the neural bases of arousal and purposeful movement is very extensive. Their reliability as indicators of consciousness is disputed, however, due to numerous studies showing that alert human subjects can be induced to behave purposefully in a variety of ways in spite of reporting a complete lack of awareness. Studies of the neuroscience of free will have also shown that the experiences that people report when they behave purposefully sometimes do not correspond to their actual behaviors or to the patterns of electrical activity recorded from their brains. [ Human volition: towards a neuroscience of will Patrick Haggard Nature Reviews Neuroscience 2008 9 934–946 19020512 ] Another approach applies specifically to the study of self-awareness, that is, the ability to distinguish oneself from others. In the 1970s Gordon Gallup developed an operational test for self-awareness, known as the mirror test. The test examines whether animals are able to differentiate between seeing themselves in a mirror versus seeing other animals. The classic example involves placing a spot of coloring on the skin or fur near the individual&apos;s forehead and seeing if they attempt to remove it or at least touch the spot, thus indicating that they recognize that the individual they are seeing in the mirror is themselves. [ Gordon Gallup Chimpanzees: Self recognition Science 167 86–87 1970 10.1126/science.167.3914.86 4982211 ] Humans (older than 18 months) and other great apes, bottlenose dolphin s, pigeons, and elephants have all been observed to pass this test. [ Animal consciousness: a synthetic approach David Edelman and Anil Seth Trends in Neurosciences 2009 32 476–484 19716185 ] [ Neural correlates ] { Christof Koch } A major part of the scientific literature on consciousness consists of studies that examine the relationship between the experiences reported by subjects and the activity that simultaneously takes place in their brains—that is, studies of the neural correlates of consciousness. The hope is to find that activity in a particular part of the brain, or a particular pattern of global brain activity, will be strongly predictive of conscious awareness. Several brain imaging techniques, such as EEG and fMRI, have been used for physical measures of brain activity in these studies. [ Christof Koch 2004 The Quest for Consciousness Englewood CO Roberts &amp; Company 978-0-9747077-0-9 16–19 ] One idea that has drawn attention for several decades is that consciousness is associated with high-frequency (gamma band) oscillations in brain activity. This idea arose from proposals in the 1980s, by Christof von der Malsburg and Wolf Singer, that gamma oscillations could solve the so-called binding problem, by linking information represented in different parts of the brain into a unified experience. [ Binding by synchrony Wolf Singer Scholarpedia http://www.scholarpedia.org/article/Binding_by_synchrony 2011-10-26 ] Rodolfo Llinás, for example, proposed that consciousness results from recurrent thalamo-cortical resonance where the specific thalamocortical systems (content) and the non-specific (centromedial thalamus) thalamocortical systems (context) interact in the gamma band frequency via temporal coincidence. [ Rodolfo Llinás 2002 I of the Vortex. From Neurons to Self MIT Press 978-0-262-62163-2 ] A number of studies have shown that activity in primary sensory areas of the brain is not sufficient to produce consciousness: it is possible for subjects to report a lack of awareness even when areas such as the primary visual cortex show clear electrical responses to a stimulus. { Koch, The Quest for Consciousness, pp. 105–116 } Higher brain areas are seen as more promising, especially the prefrontal cortex, which is involved in a range of higher cognitive functions collectively known as executive functions. There is substantial evidence that a &quot; top-down &quot; flow of neural activity (i.e., activity propagating from the frontal cortex to sensory areas) is more predictive of conscious awareness than a &quot; bottom-up &quot; flow of activity. [ A framework for consciousness Francis Crick and Christof Koch 2003 Nature Neuroscience 6 119–126 12555104 http://papers.klab.caltech.edu/29/1/438.pdf PDF 10.1038/nn0203-119 ] The prefrontal cortex is not the only candidate area, however: studies by Nikos Logothetis and his colleagues have shown, for example, that visually responsive neurons in parts of the temporal lobe reflect the visual perception in the situation when conflicting visual images are presented to different eyes (i.e., bistable percepts during binocular rivalry). { Koch, The Quest for Consciousness, pp. 269–286 } In 2011 Graziano and Kastner [ Graziano, M.S.A. and Kastner, S 2011 Human consciousness and its relationship to social neuroscience: A novel hypothesis Cog. Neurosci 2 98-113 ] proposed the “attention schema” theory of awareness. In that theory specific cortical machinery, notably in the superior temporal sulcus and the temporo-parietal junction, is used to build the construct of awareness and attribute it to other people. The same cortical machinery is also used to attribute awareness to oneself. Damage to this cortical machinery can lead to deficits in consciousness such as hemispatial neglect. In the attention schema theory, the value of constructing the feature of awareness and attributing it to a person is to gain a useful predictive model of that person’s attentional processing. Attention is a style of information processing in which a brain focuses its resources on a limited set of interrelated signals. Awareness, in this theory, is a useful, simplified schema that represents attentional state. To be aware of X is to construct a model of one’s attentional focus on X. [ Defining consciousness ] &quot; The evolution of the capacity to simulate seems to have culminated in subjective consciousness. Why this should have happened is, to me, the most profound mystery facing modern biology &quot; Richard Dawkins, The Selfish Gene. Since 1976, it has remained so. In 2004, eight neuroscientists felt it was too soon for a definition. They wrote an apology in &quot; Human Brain Function &quot; : { Human Brain Function, by Richard Frackowiak and 7 other neuroscientists, page 269 in chapter 16 &quot; The Neural Correlates of Consciousness &quot; (consisting of 32 pages), published 2004 } &quot; We have no idea how consciousness emerges from the physical activity of the brain and we do not know whether consciousness can emerge from non-biological systems, such as computers... At this point the reader will expect to find a careful and precise definition of consciousness. You will be disappointed. Consciousness has not yet become a scientific term that can be defined in this way. Currently we all use the term consciousness in many different and often ambiguous ways. Precise definitions of different aspects of consciousness will emerge... but to make precise definitions at this stage is premature. &quot; In contrast to philosophical definitions, an operational definition can be tested experimentally, and is useful for current research. A current definition for self awareness, proposed in the 1970s by Gordon Gallup, is known as the mirror test. An operational definition proposed in 2012 { What Consciousness is } { Roc Ordman &apos;s Consciousness class, } { Beloit College, 2012, } states &quot; consciousness is the sum of the electrical discharges occurring throughout the nervous system of a being at any given instant &quot;. This operational definition is based on Dennett&apos;s theory of the Multiple Drafts Model of Consciousness, arising from the Buddha&apos;s pluripotent model of consciousness. What many consider consciousness may simply be the personal awareness of all the neurons delivering messages to the mind, but operational consciousness can include all neuronal activity. Extending this concept to all sentient beings, one can measure a range of consciousness based on how many and how powerfully neurons are actually firing, varying from worms to humans. One can answer the question, is someone asleep less conscious than someone thinking about a difficult problem. Although technology does not exist currently to measure this, it can be estimated by determining oxygen consumption by the brain. Christof Koch lists the following fourdefinitions of consciousness in his latest book { Consciousness, Confessions of a Romantic Reductionist, Christof Koch, 2012, MIT Press }, which can besummarized as follows: Consciousness is the inner mental life that welose each night when we fall into dreamless sleep, consciousness canbe measured with the Glasgow Coma Scale that assesses the reactions ofpatients, an active cortico-thalamic complex is necessary forconsciousness in humans, and put philosophically, consciousness iswhat it is like to feel something. [ Biological function and evolution ] Regarding the primary function of conscious processing, a recurring idea in recent theories is that phenomenal states somehow integrate neural activities and information-processing that would otherwise be independent. [ Bernard Baars The conscious access hypothesis: Origins and recent evidence Trends in Cognitive Sciences 6 47–52 11849615 10.1016/S1364-6613(00)01819-2 ] This has been called the integration consensus. Another example has been proposed by Gerald Edelman called dynamic core hypothesis which puts emphasis on reentrant connections that reciprocally link areas of the brain in a massively parallel manner. [ Seth Anil Eugene Izhikevich, George Reeke, Gerald Edelman Theories and measures of consciousness: An extended framework Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2006 103 28 10.1073/pnas.0604347103 ] These theories of integrative function present solutions to two classic problems associated with consciousness: differentiation and unity. They show how our conscious experience can discriminate between infinitely different possible scenes and details (differentiation) because it integrates those details from our sensory systems, while the integrative nature of consciousness in this view easily explains how our experience can seem unified as one whole despite all of these individual parts. However, it remains unspecified which kinds of information are integrated in a conscious manner and which kinds can be integrated without consciousness. Nor is it explained what specific causal role conscious integration plays, nor why the same functionality cannot be achieved without consciousness. Obviously not all kinds of information are capable of being disseminated consciously (e.g., neural activity related to vegetative functions, reflexes, unconscious motor programs, low-level perceptual analyses, etc.) and many kinds of information can be disseminated and combined with other kinds without consciousness, as in intersensory interactions such as the ventriloquism effect. [ Ezequiel Morsella 2005 The function of phenomenal states: Supramodular Interaction Theory Psychological Review 112 1000–1021 16262477 ] Hence it remains unclear why any of it is conscious. For a review of the differences between conscious and unconscious integrations, see As noted earlier, even among writers who consider consciousness to be a well-defined thing, there is widespread dispute about which animals other than humans can be said to possess it. [ S. Budiansky If a Lion Could Talk: Animal Intelligence and the Evolution of Consciousness 1998 The Free Press 978-0-684-83710-9 ] Thus, any examination of the evolution of consciousness is faced with great difficulties. Nevertheless, some writers have argued that consciousness can be viewed from the standpoint of evolutionary biology as an adaptation in the sense of a trait that increases fitness. [ S. Nichols, T. Grantham Adaptive Complexity and Phenomenal Consciousness 2000 Philosophy of Science 67 648–670 ] In his paper &quot; Evolution of consciousness, &quot; John Eccles argued that special anatomical and physical properties of the mammalian cerebral cortex gave rise to consciousness. [ John Eccles Evolution of consciousness Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 89 7320–7324 1992 1502142 49701 10.1073/pnas.89.16.7320 ] Bernard Baars proposed that once in place, this &quot; recursive &quot; circuitry may have provided a basis for the subsequent development of many of the functions that consciousness facilitates in higher organisms. [ Bernard Baars A Cognitive Theory of Consciousness 1993 Cambridge University Press 978-0-521-42743-2 ] Peter Carruthers has put forth one such potential adaptive advantage gained by conscious creatures by suggesting that consciousness allows an individual to make distinctions between appearance and reality. [ Carruthers Peter Phenomenal Consciousness: A Naturalistic Theory 2004 Cambridge University Press Cambridge, UK ] This ability would enable a creature to recognize the likelihood that their perceptions are deceiving them (e.g. that water in the distance may be a mirage) and behave accordingly, and it could also facilitate the manipulation of others by recognizing how things appear to them for both cooperative and devious ends. Other philosophers, however, have suggested that consciousness would not be necessary for any functional advantage in evolutionary processes. [ Owen Flanagan and T. W. Polger 1995 Zombies and the function of consciousness Journal of Consciousness Studies 2 313–321 ] [ Rosenthal David Consciousness and its function Neuropsychologia 2008 46 829-840 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2007.11.012 ] No one has given a causal explanation, they argue, of why it would not be possible for a functionally equivalent non-conscious organism (i.e., a philosophical zombie ) to achieve the very same survival advantages as a conscious organism. If evolutionary processes are blind to the difference between function F being performed by conscious organism O and non-conscious organism O*, it is unclear what adaptive advantage consciousness could provide. [ Stevan Harnad 2002 Turing indistinguishability and the Blind Watchmaker J. H. Fetzer Consciousness Evolving John Benjamins http://cogprints.org/1615 2011-10-26 ] As a result, an exaptive explanation of consciousness has gained favor with some theorists that posit consciousness did not evolve as an adaptation but was an exaptation arising as a consequence of other developments such as increases in brain size or cortical rearrangement. [ States of consciousness ] A Buddhist monk meditating There are some states in which consciousness seems to be abolished, including sleep, coma, and death. There are also a variety of circumstances that can change the relationship between the mind and the world in less drastic ways, producing what are known as altered states of consciousness. Some altered states occur naturally; others can be produced by drugs or brain damage. [ Dieter Vaitl et al. Psychobiology of altered states of consciousness 2005 Psychological Bulletin 131 98–127 ] The two most widely accepted altered states are sleep and dream ing. Although dream sleep and non-dream sleep appear very similar to an outside observer, each is associated with a distinct pattern of brain activity, metabolic activity, and eye movement; each is also associated with a distinct pattern of experience and cognition. During ordinary non-dream sleep, people who are awakened report only vague and sketchy thoughts, and their experiences do not cohere into a continuous narrative. During dream sleep, in contrast, people who are awakened report rich and detailed experiences in which events form a continuous progression, which may however be interrupted by bizarre or fantastic intrusions. Thought processes during the dream state frequently show a high level of irrationality. Both dream and non-dream states are associated with severe disruption of memory: it usually disappears in seconds during the non-dream state, and in minutes after awakening from a dream unless actively refreshed. [ J. Allan Hobson, Edward F. Pace-Schott, and Robert Stickgold Dreaming and the brain: Toward a cognitive neuroscience of conscious states Sleep and Dreaming: Scientific Advances and Reconsiderations Edward F. Pace-Schott, Mark Solms, Mark Blagrove, Stevan Harnad 2003 Cambridge University Press 978-0-521-00869-3 ] A variety of psychoactive drug s have notable effects on consciousness. These range from a simple dulling of awareness produced by sedative s, to increases in the intensity of sensory qualities produced by stimulant s, cannabis, or most notably by the class of drugs known as psychedelics. LSD, mescaline, psilocybin, and others in this group can produce major distortions of perception, including hallucinations; some users even describe their drug-induced experiences as mystical or spiritual in quality. The brain mechanisms underlying these effects are not well understood, but there is substantial evidence that alterations in the brain system that uses the chemical neurotransmitter serotonin play an essential role. [ Michael Lyvers The neurochemistry of psychedelic experiences 2003 ePublications@bond http://epublications.bond.edu.au/hss_pubs/10 PDF ] There has been some research into physiological changes in yogis and people who practise various techniques of meditation. Some research with brain waves during meditation has reported differences between those corresponding to ordinary relaxation and those corresponding to meditation. It has been disputed, however, whether there is enough evidence to count these as physiologically distinct states of consciousness. [ M. Murphy, S. Donovan, and E. Taylor 1997 The Physical and Psychological Effects of Meditation: A Review of Contemporary Research With a Comprehensive Bibliography, 1931-1996 Institute of Noetic Sciences ] The most extensive study of the characteristics of altered states of consciousness was made by psychologist Charles Tart in the 1960s and 1970s. Tart analyzed a state of consciousness as made up of a number of component processes, including exteroception (sensing the external world); interoception (sensing the body); input-processing (seeing meaning); emotions; memory; time sense; sense of identity; evaluation and cognitive processing; motor output; and interaction with the environment. [ Charles Tart States of Consciousness Ch. 2: The components of consciousness 2001 IUniverse.com 978-0-595-15196-7 http://www.psychedelic-library.org/soc2.htm 2011-10-05 ] Each of these, in his view, could be altered in multiple ways by drugs or other manipulations. The components that Tart identified have not, however, been validated by empirical studies. Research in this area has not yet reached firm conclusions, but a recent questionnaire-based study identified eleven significant factors contributing to drug-induced states of consciousness: experience of unity; spiritual experience; blissful state; insightfulness; disembodiment; impaired control and cognition; anxiety; complex imagery; elementary imagery; audio-visual synesthesia; and changed meaning of percepts. [ Psychometric evaluation of the altered states of consciousness rating scale (OAV) E. Studerus, A. Gamma, and F. X. Vollenweider PLoS ONE 2010 8 20824211 2930851 10.1371/journal.pone.0012412 ] [ Phenomenology ] Phenomenology is a method of inquiry that attempts to examine the structure of consciousness in its own right, putting aside problems regarding the relationship of consciousness to the physical world. This approach was first proposed by the philosopher Edmund Husserl, and later elaborated by other philosophers and scientists. [ Robert Sokolowski Introduction to Phenomenology 2000 Cambridge University Press 211–227 978-0-521-66792-0 ] Husserl&apos;s original concept gave rise to two distinct lines of inquiry, in philosophy and psychology. In philosophy, phenomenology has largely been devoted to fundamental metaphysical questions, such as the nature of intentionality ( &quot; aboutness &quot; ). In psychology, phenomenology largely has meant attempting to investigate consciousness using the method of introspection, which means looking into one&apos;s own mind and reporting what one observes. This method fell into disrepute in the early twentieth century because of grave doubts about its reliability, but has been rehabilitated to some degree, especially when used in combination with techniques for examining brain activity. [ Trusting the Subject?: The Use of Introspective Evidence in Cognitive Science, Volume 1 Anthony Jack, Andreas Roepstorff Imprint Academic 2003 978-0-907845-56-0 Valid and non-reactive verbalization of thoughts during performance of tasks: towards a solution to the central problems of introspection as a source of scientific evidence K. Anders Ericsson 1–18 ] { Neon color spreading effect. The apparent bluish tinge of the white areas inside the circle is an illusion. } Introspectively, the world of conscious experience seems to have considerable structure. Immanuel Kant asserted that the world as we perceive it is organized according to a set of fundamental &quot; intuitions &quot;, which include object (we perceive the world as a set of distinct things); shape; quality (color, warmth, etc.); space (distance, direction, and location); and time. [ Kant&apos;s view of the mind and consciousness of self Andrew Brook Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/kant-mind/#3.2.1 ] { Note: translating Kant&apos;s terminology into English is often difficult. } Some of these constructs, such as space and time, correspond to the way the world is structured by the laws of physics; for others the correspondence is not as clear. Understanding the physical basis of qualities, such as redness or pain, has been particularly challenging. David Chalmers has called this the hard problem of consciousness. Some philosophers have argued that it is intrinsically unsolvable, because qualities ( &quot; qualia &quot; ) are ineffable; that is, they are &quot; raw feels &quot;, incapable of being analyzed into component processes. [ On leaving out what it&apos;s like Joseph Levine The Nature of Consciousness: Philosophical Debates N. Block, O. Flanagan, G. Guzeldere 1998 MIT Press 978-0-262-52210-6 ] Most psychologists and neuroscientists have not accepted these arguments — nevertheless it is clear that the relationship between a physical entity such as light and a perceptual quality such as color is extraordinarily complex and indirect, as demonstrated by a variety of optical illusion s such as neon color spreading. [ The Science of Color Steven K. Shevell Color appearance Steven K. Shevell 149–190 2003 Elsevier 978-0-444-51251-2 ] In neuroscience, a great deal of effort has gone into investigating how the perceived world of conscious awareness is constructed inside the brain. The process is generally thought to involve two primary mechanisms: (1) hierarchical processing of sensory inputs, (2) memory. Signals arising from sensory organs are transmitted to the brain and then processed in a series of stages, which extract multiple types of information from the raw input. In the visual system, for example, sensory signals from the eyes are transmitted to the thalamus and then to the primary visual cortex; inside the cerebral cortex they are sent to areas that extract features such as three-dimensional structure, shape, color, and motion. [ Philosophical Foundations of Neuroscience M. R. Bennett and Peter Michael Stephan Hacker 2003 Wiley-Blackwell 978-1-4051-0838-6 121–147 ] Memory comes into play in at least two ways. First, it allows sensory information to be evaluated in the context of previous experience. Second, and even more importantly, working memory allows information to be integrated over time so that it can generate a stable representation of the world— Gerald Edelman expressed this point vividly by titling one of his books about consciousness The Remembered Present. [ Gerald Edelman The Remembered Present: A Biological Theory of Consciousness Basic Books 1989 978-0-465-06910-1 109–118 ] Despite the large amount of information available, the most important aspects of perception remain mysterious. A great deal is known about low-level signal processing in sensory systems, but the ways by which sensory systems interact with each other, with &quot; executive &quot; systems in the frontal cortex, and with the language system are very incompletely understood. At a deeper level, there are still basic conceptual issues that remain unresolved. Many scientists have found it difficult to reconcile the fact that information is distributed across multiple brain areas with the apparent unity of consciousness: this is one aspect of the so-called binding problem. { Koch, The Quest for Consciousness, pp. 167–170 } There are also some scientists who have expressed grave reservations about the idea that the brain forms representations of the outside world at all: influential members of this group include psychologist J. J. Gibson and roboticist Rodney Brooks, who both argued in favor of &quot; intelligence without representation &quot;. [ Rodney Brooks Intelligence without representation 1991 Artificial Intelligence 47 139–159 10.1016/0004-3702(91)90053-M ] [ Medical aspects ] The medical approach to consciousness is practically oriented. It derives from a need to treat people whose brain function has been impaired as a result of disease, brain damage, toxins, or drugs. In medicine, conceptual distinctions are considered useful to the degree that they can help to guide treatments. Whereas the philosophical approach to consciousness focuses on its fundamental nature and its contents, the medical approach focuses on the amount of consciousness a person has: in medicine, consciousness is assessed as a &quot; level &quot; ranging from coma and brain death at the low end, to full alertness and purposeful responsiveness at the high end. [ The Neurology of Consciousness: Cognitive Neuroscience and Neuropathology Steven Laureys, Guilio Tononi The neurological examination of consciousness Hal Blumenfeld 2009 Academic Press 978-0-12-374168-4 ] Consciousness is of concern to patients and physicians, especially neurologists and anesthesiologists. Patients may suffer from disorders of consciousness, or may need to be anesthetized for a surgical procedure. Physicians may perform consciousness-related interventions such as instructing the patient to sleep, administering general anesthesia, or inducing medical coma. Also, bioethicists may be concerned with the ethical implications of consciousness in medical cases of patients such as Karen Ann Quinlan, [ Kinney HC, Korein J, Panigrahy A, Dikkes P, Goode R 26 May 1994 21 N Engl J Med 1469–1475 8164698 Neuropathological findings in the brain of Karen Ann Quinlan -- the role of the thalamus in the persistent vegetative state 330 10.1056/NEJM199405263302101 ] while neuroscientists may study patients with impaired consciousness in hopes of gaining information about how the brain works. { Koch, The Quest for Consciousness, pp. 216–226 } [ Assessment ] In medicine, consciousness is examined using a set of procedures known as neuropsychological assessment. [ J. T. Giacino, C. M. Smart 2007 10.1097/WCO.0b013e3282f189ef Current Opinion in Neurology 614–619 17992078 Recent advances in behavioral assessment of individuals with disorders of consciousness 20 ] There are two commonly used methods for assessing the level of consciousness of a patient: a simple procedure that requires minimal training, and a more complex procedure that requires substantial expertise. The simple procedure begins by asking whether the patient is able to move and react to physical stimuli. If so, the next question is whether the patient can respond in a meaningful way to questions and commands. If so, the patient is asked for name, current location, and current day and time. A patient who can answer all of these questions is said to be &quot; oriented times three &quot; (sometimes denoted &quot; Ox3 &quot; on a medical chart), and is usually considered fully conscious. [ Essentials of Abnormal Psychology V. Mark Durand and David H. Barlow Cengage Learning 2009 978-0-495-59982-1 74–75 ] { Note: A patient who can additionally describe the current situation may be referred to as &quot; oriented times four &quot;. } The more complex procedure is known as a neurological examination, and is usually carried out by a neurologist in a hospital setting. A formal neurological examination runs through a precisely delineated series of tests, beginning with tests for basic sensorimotor reflexes, and culminating with tests for sophisticated use of language. The outcome may be summarized using the Glasgow Coma Scale, which yields a number in the range 3—15, with a score of 3 indicating brain death (the lowest defined level of consciousness), and 15 indicating full consciousness. The Glasgow Coma Scale has three subscales, measuring the best motor response (ranging from &quot; no motor response &quot; to &quot; obeys commands &quot; ), the best eye response (ranging from &quot; no eye opening &quot; to &quot; eyes opening spontaneously &quot; ) and the best verbal response (ranging from &quot; no verbal response &quot; to &quot; fully oriented &quot; ). There is also a simpler pediatric version of the scale, for children too young to be able to use language. [ Disorders of consciousness ] Medical conditions that inhibit consciousness are considered disorders of consciousness. This category generally includes minimally conscious state and persistent vegetative state, but sometimes also includes the less severe locked-in syndrome and more severe chronic coma. [ Bernat JL 8 Apr 2006 10.1016/S0140-6736(06)68508-5 9517 Lancet 1181–1192 16616561 Chronic disorders of consciousness 367 ] [ Bernat JL 20 Jul 2010 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181e8e960 3 Neurol 206–207 20554939 The natural history of chronic disorders of consciousness 75 ] Differential diagnosis of these disorders is an active area of biomedical research. [ Coleman MR, Davis MH, Rodd JM, Robson T, Ali A, Owen AM, Pickard JD September 2009 10.1093/brain/awp183 9 Brain 2541–2552 19710182 Towards the routine use of brain imaging to aid the clinical diagnosis of disorders of consciousness 132 ] [ Monti MM, Vanhaudenhuyse A, Coleman MR, Boly M, Pickard JD, Tshibanda L, Owen AM, Laureys S 18 Feb 2010 10.1056/NEJMoa0905370 7 N Engl J Med 579–589 20130250 Willful modulation of brain activity in disorders of consciousness 362 ] [ Seel RT, Sherer M, Whyte J, Katz DI, Giacino JT, Rosenbaum AM, Hammond FM, Kalmar K, Pape TL, et al. December 2010 10.1016/j.apmr.2011.01.002 12 Arch Phys Med Rehabil 1795–1813 21112421 Assessment scales for disorders of consciousness: evidence-based recommendations for clinical practice and research 91 ] Finally, brain death results in an irreversible disruption of consciousness. While other conditions may cause a moderate deterioration (e.g., dementia and delirium ) or transient interruption (e.g., grand mal and petit mal seizures ) of consciousness, they are not included in this category. Disorder Description Locked-in syndrome The patient has awareness, sleep-wake cycles, and meaningful behavior (viz., eye-movement), but is isolated due to quadriplegia and pseudobulbar palsy. Minimally conscious state The patient has intermittent periods of awareness and wakefulness and displays some meaningful behavior. Persistent vegetative state The patient has sleep-wake cycles, but lacks awareness and only displays reflexive and non-purposeful behavior. Chronic coma The patient lacks awareness and sleep-wake cycles and only displays reflexive behavior. Brain death The patient lacks awareness, sleep-wake cycles, and behavior. [ Anosognosia ] One of the most striking disorders of consciousness goes by the name anosognosia, a Greek-derived term meaning unawareness of disease. This is a condition in which patients are disabled in some way, most commonly as a result of a stroke, but either misunderstand the nature of the problem or deny that there is anything wrong with them. [ George Prigatano, Daniel Schacter Awareness of Deficit After Brain Injury: Clinical and Theoretical Issues Oxford University Press 1991 Introduction George P. Prigatano and Daniel Schacter 3–16 0-19-505941-7 ] The most frequently occurring form is seen in people who have experienced a stroke damaging the parietal lobe in the right hemisphere of the brain, giving rise to a syndrome known as hemispatial neglect, characterized by an inability to direct action or attention toward objects located to the right with respect to their bodies. Patients with hemispatial neglect are often paralyzed on the right side of the body, but sometimes deny being unable to move. When questioned about the obvious problem, the patient may avoid giving a direct answer, or may give an explanation that doesn&apos;t make sense. Patients with hemispatial neglect may also fail to recognize paralyzed parts of their bodies: one frequently mentioned case is of a man who repeatedly tried to throw his own paralyzed right leg out of the bed he was lying in, and when asked what he was doing, complained that somebody had put a dead leg into the bed with him. An even more striking type of anosognosia is Anton–Babinski syndrome, a rarely occurring condition in which patients become blind but claim to be able to see normally, and persist in this claim in spite of all evidence to the contrary. [ George Prigatano, Daniel Schacter Awareness of Deficit After Brain Injury: Clinical and Theoretical Issues Oxford University Press 1991 Anosognosia: possible neuropsychological mechanisms Kenneth M. Heilman 53–62 0-19-505941-7 ] [ Stream of consciousness ] William James is usually credited with popularizing the idea that human consciousness flows like a stream, in his Principles of Psychology of 1890. According to James, the &quot; stream of thought &quot; is governed by five characteristics: &quot; (1) Every thought tends to be part of a personal consciousness. (2) Within each personal consciousness thought is always changing. (3) Within each personal consciousness thought is sensibly continuous. (4) It always appears to deal with objects independent of itself. (5) It is interested in some parts of these objects to the exclusion of others &quot;. [ William James The Principles of Psychology, Volume 1 1890 H. Holt 225 ] A similar concept appears in Buddhist philosophy, expressed by the Sanskrit term Citta-saṃtāna, which is usually translated as mindstream or &quot; mental continuum &quot;. In the Buddhist view, though, the &quot; mindstream &quot; is viewed primarily as a source of noise that distracts attention from a changeless underlying reality. [ Losing the Clouds, Gaining the Sky: Buddhism and the Natural Mind Taming the mindstream Dzogchen Rinpoche Doris Wolter 2007 Wisdom Publications 978-0-86171-359-2 81–92 ] In the west, the primary impact of the idea has been on literature rather than science: stream of consciousness as a narrative mode means writing in a way that attempts to portray the moment-to-moment thoughts and experiences of a character. This technique perhaps had its beginnings in the monologues of Shakespeare&apos;s plays, and reached its fullest development in the novels of James Joyce and Virginia Woolf, although it has also been used by many other noted writers. [ Robert Humphrey Stream of Consciousness in the Modern Novel 1954 University of California Press 978-0-520-00585-3 23–49 ] Here for example is a passage from Joyce&apos;s Ulysses about the thoughts of Molly Bloom: [ James Joyce Ulysses 1990 BompaCrazy.com 620 ] [ See also ] [ Medicine Mind and Brain Philosophy ] [ 3 ] Antahkarana Blindsight Causality Centipede&apos;s dilemma Cognitive neuroscience Cognitive psychology Explanation Explanatory gap Functionalism (philosophy of mind) Hard problem of consciousness Merkwelt Mind Mind-body problem Mirror neuron Neuropsychological assessment Neuropsychology Orch-OR Phenomenology Philosophical zombie Philosophy of mind Problem of other minds Quantum mind Reverse engineering Sentience Solipsism Turing test [ References ] [ 2 ] [ External links ] [ consciousness ] [ consciousness studies ] Consciousness Studies at the Open Directory Project &apos;&apos;Anthropology of Consciousness&apos;&apos; &apos;&apos;Consciousness and Cognition&apos;&apos; &apos;&apos;Consciousness &amp; Emotion&apos;&apos; &apos;&apos;Journal of Consciousness Studies&apos;&apos; Quantum Mind &apos;&apos;Psyche&apos;&apos; (ASSC) Category:Cognitive neuroscience Category:Cognitive psychology Category:Consciousness Category:Neuropsychology Category:Neuropsychological assessment Category:Phenomenology Category:Philosophy of mind Category:Cognition Category:Mental processes [ de ] ar:وعي zh-min-nan:Ì-sek be-x-old:Сьвядомасьць bg:Съзнание ca:Consciència (psicologia) cv:Намăс cs:Vědomí da:Bevidsthed (psykologi) de:Bewusstsein et:Teadvus es:Conciencia (filosofía) eo:Konscio fa:خودآگاهی (فلسفه ذهن) fr:Conscience gan:意識 ko:의식 (신경심리학) hi:चेतना hr:Svijest id:Kesadaran is:Meðvitund it:Coscienza (psicologia) he:תודעה kn:ಅರಿವು ku:Hişar la:Conscientia lv:Apziņa nl:Bewustzijn ja:意識 no:Bevissthet pl:Świadomość pt:Consciência ru:Сознание (философия) sq:Vetëdija simple:Consciousness sk:Vedomie ckb:ھۆشیاری sr:Свест fi:Tietoisuus sv:Medvetande tr:Bilinç uk:Свідомість ur:شعور zh:意识