[ Flag of the NSDAP (1920–1945).svg 22px ] { Nazi Party } [ Flag of the NSDAP (1920–1945).svg 22px ] { Sturmabteilung } [ Bavaria ] { Government of Bavaria } [ Flag of Weimar Republic (war).svg 22px ] { Reichswehr } [ Flag of the NSDAP (1920–1945).svg 22px ] { Adolf Hitler } [ Flag of the NSDAP (1920–1945).svg 22px ] { Erich Ludendorff } [ Flag of the NSDAP (1920–1945).svg 22px ] { Ernst Röhm } [ Flag of the NSDAP (1920–1945).svg 22px ] { Rudolf Hess } [ Flag of the NSDAP (1920–1945).svg 22px ] { Ludwig Maximilian Erwin von Scheubner-Richter } [ Flag of the NSDAP (1920–1945).svg 22px ] { Hermann Göring } [ Bavaria ] { Gustav Ritter von Kahr } [ Bavaria ] { Eugen von Knilling } [ Bavaria ] { Hans Ritter von Seisser } [ Flag of Weimar Republic (war).svg 22px ] { Otto von Lossow } { 3,000 } { 100 } { 16 } { 4 } The Beer Hall Putsch (also known as the Munich Putsch, { Dan Moorhouse, ed. The Munich Putsch. schoolshistory.org.uk, accessed 2008-05-31. } [ Hitlerputsch ] or [ Hitler-Ludendorff-Putsch ] ) was a failed attempt at revolution that occurred between the evening of 8 November and the early afternoon of 9 November 1923, when Nazi Party leader Adolf Hitler, Generalquartiermeister Erich Ludendorff, and other heads of the Kampfbund unsuccessfully tried to seize power in Munich, Bavaria, Germany. [ Background ] Beer hall s in the early 20th century existed in most larger southern German cities, where hundreds or even thousands of people were able to gather during the evenings, drink beer and often engage in political or social debate. They were also places where political rallies could be held, a tradition still alive today. One of the largest beer halls in Munich was the &quot; Bürgerbräukeller &quot;, where the Beer Hall Putsch was launched. Adolf Hitler at age 35 German power and prestige were destroyed in the aftermath of World War I. Like many other German nationalists, Hitler believed in the Dolchstoßlegende ( Stab-in-the-back legend ), which claimed that the army, &quot; undefeated in the field, &quot; had been &quot; stabbed in the back &quot; by civilian leaders and Marxists back on the home front, later dubbed the November Criminals. [ Kershaw 2008 61–63 ] In Munich, Hitler took part in &quot; national thinking &quot; courses organized by the Education and Propaganda Department of the Bavarian Reichswehr under Captain Karl Mayr. [ Kershaw 2008 72–74 ] Thereafter, Captain Mayr ordered Hitler, then an Army corporal, to infiltrate the tiny Deutsche Arbeiterpartei, abbreviated DAP ( German Workers Party ). [ Kershaw 2008 75 ] Hitler joined the DAP on 12 September 1919. [ Stackelberg Roderick The Routledge Companion to Nazi Germany 2007 Routledge New York, NY 978-0-415-30860-1 9 ] Hitler rose to its top post in the chaotic political atmosphere of postwar Munich. { Sayers, Michael and Kahnn, Albert E. (1945), The Plot Against the Peace, Dial Press } By agreement, Hitler was given the political leadership of several Bavarian &quot; patriotic associations &quot; ( revanchist ) which collectively were known as the Kampfbund. [ Kershaw 2008 124 ] With this political base, Hitler could call on about 15,000 brawlers, mostly ex-soldiers. On 26 September 1923, following a period of turmoil and political violence, Bavarian Prime Minister Eugen von Knilling declared a state of emergency and appointed Gustav von Kahr Staatskomissar (state commissioner) with dictatorial governing powers. Together with Bavarian State Police head Colonel Hans Ritter von Seisser (Seißer), and Reichswehr General Otto von Lossow, Kahr formed a triumvirate. [ Kershaw 2008 125–126 ] Hitler announced that starting on 27 September 1923, he would be holding 14 mass meetings. One of Kahr&apos;s first actions was to ban the meetings. [ Kershaw 2008 125 ] Hitler was under pressure to act. The Nazis, with other leaders in the Kampfbund, felt they had to march upon Berlin and seize power or their followers would turn to the Communists. [ Kershaw 2008 126 ] Hitler enlisted the help of World War I General Ludendorff in an attempt to gain the support of Kahr and his triumvirate. However, Kahr had his own plan with Seisser and Lossow to install a nationalist dictatorship without Hitler. [ The Putsch ] [ September 2010 ] The attempted putsch was inspired by Benito Mussolini &apos;s successful March on Rome. Hitler and his associates planned to use Munich as a base for a big march against Germany&apos;s Weimar Republic government. But the circumstances were different from those in Italy. Hitler came to the realization that von Kahr sought to control him and was not ready to act against the government in Berlin. Hitler wanted to seize a critical moment for successful popular agitation and support. [ Kershaw 2008 125–127 ] He decided to take matters into his own hands. Hitler, along with a large detachment of SA, marched on the Bürgerbräukeller, a Munich beer hall where von Kahr was making a speech in front of 3,000 people. { Piers Brendon, The Dark Valley: A Panorama of the 1930s, p 36 ISBN 0-375-40881-9 } In the cold, dark evening, 600 SA surrounded the beer hall and a machine gun was set up in the auditorium. Hitler, surrounded by his associates Hermann Göring, Alfred Rosenberg, Rudolf Hess, Ernst Hanfstaengl, Ulrich Graf, Johann Aigner, Adolf Lenk, Max Amann, Scheubner-Richter, Wilhelm Adam, and others (some 20 in all), advanced through the crowded auditorium. Unable to be heard above the crowd, Hitler fired a shot into the ceiling and jumped on a chair yelling: &quot; The national revolution has broken out! The hall is filled with six hundred men. Nobody is allowed to leave. &quot; He went on to state the Bavarian government was deposed and declared the formation of a new government with Ludendorff. [ Kershaw 2008 128 ] Hitler, accompanied by Rudolf Hess, Adolf Lenk and Ulrich Graf, ordered the triumvirate of von Kahr, von Seisser, and von Lossow into an adjoining room at gunpoint and demanded they support the putsch. { Piers Brendon, The Dark Valley: A Panorama of the 1930s, pp 36-7 ISBN 0-375-40881-9 } Hitler thought that he would get an immediate response of affirmation from them, imploring von Kahr to accept a position as Regent of Bavaria. Von Kahr replied that he could not be expected to collaborate, especially as he had been taken out of the auditorium under heavy guard. [ February 2012 ] Heinz Pernet, Johann Aigner and Scheubner-Richter were dispatched to pick up Ludendorff, whose personal prestige was being harnessed to give the Nazis credibility. A telephone call was made from the kitchen by Hermann Kriebel to Ernst Röhm, who was waiting with his Reichskriegsflagge in the Löwenbräukeller, another beer hall, and he was ordered to seize key buildings throughout the city. At the same time, co-conspirators under Gerhard Rossbach mobilized the students of a nearby Officers Infantry school to seize other objectives. Hitler became irritated by von Kahr and summoned Ernst Pöhner, Friedrich Weber and Hermann Kriebel to stand in for him while he returned to the auditorium flanked by Rudolf Hess and Adolf Lenkwhere. He followed up on Göring&apos;s speech and stated that the action was not directed at the police and Reichswehr, but against &quot;...the Berlin Jew government and the November criminals of 1918 &quot;. Dr. Karl Alexander von Mueller, a professor of modern history and political science at the University of Munich and a supporter of von Kahr, was an eyewitness. He reported: I cannot remember in my entire life such a change in the attitude of a crowd in a few minutes, almost a few seconds... Hitler had turned them inside out, as one turns a glove inside out, with a few sentences. It had almost something of hocus-pocus, or magic about it. Hitler ended his speech with: &quot; Outside are Kahr, Lossow and Seisser. They are struggling hard to reach a decision. May I say to them that you will stand behind them? &quot; [ Kershaw 2008 129 ] Odeonsplatz in Munich on November 9. The crowd in the hall backed Hitler with a roar of approval. He finished triumphantly: You can see that what motivates us is neither self-conceit or self-interest, but only a burning desire to join the battle in this grave eleventh hour for our German Fatherland... One last thing I can tell you. Either the German revolution begins tonight or we will all be dead by dawn! Hitler returned to the anteroom, where the triumvirs remained, to ear-shattering acclaim which the triumvirs could not have failed to notice. On his way back, Hitler ordered Göring and Hess to take Eugen von Knilling and seven other members of the Bavarian government into custody. During Hitler&apos;s speech, Pöhner, Weber, and Kriebel had been trying in a conciliatory fashion to bring the triumvirate round to their point of view. The atmosphere in the room had become lighter but von Kahr continued to dig in his heels. Ludendorff showed up a little before 9 p.m. and, being shown into the ante-room, concentrated on von Lossow and von Seisser, appealing to their sense of duty. Eventually the triumvirate reluctantly gave in. Hitler, Ludendorff et al. returned to the main hall&apos;s podium, where they gave speeches and shook hands. The crowd was then allowed to leave the hall. In a tactical mistake, Hitler decided to leave the Bürgerbräukeller shortly thereafter to deal with a crisis elsewhere. Around 10:30 p.m., Ludendorff released von Kahr and his associates. The night was marked by confusion and unrest among government officials, armed forces, police units, and individuals deciding where their loyalties lay. Units of the Kampfbund were scurrying around to arm themselves from secret caches, and seizing buildings. At around 3 am, the first casualties of the putsch occurred when the local garrison of the Reichswehr spotted Röhm&apos;s men coming out of the beer hall. They were ambushed while trying to reach the Reichswehr barracks and had to fall back. In the meantime, the Reichswehr officers put the whole garrison on alert and called for reinforcements. Foreign attachés were seized in their hotel rooms and put under house arrest. SA men arrest Socialist city councilmen In the early morning, Hitler ordered the seizure of the Munich city council as hostage s. He further sent the communications officer of the Kampfbund, Max Neunzert, to enlist the aid of Crown Prince Rupprecht of Bavaria to mediate between von Kahr and the putschists. Neunzert failed in the mission. By midmorning on 9 November, Hitler realized that the putsch was going nowhere. The Putschists did not know what to do and were about to give up. At this moment, Ludendorff cried out, &quot; Wir marschieren! &quot; (We will march!). Röhm&apos;s force together with Hitler&apos;s (a total of approximately 2000 men) marched out - but with no specific plan of where to go. On the spur of the moment, Ludendorff led them to the Bavarian Defence Ministry. However, at the Odeonsplatz in front of the Feldherrenhalle, they met a force of 100 soldiers blocking the way under the command of State Police Senior Lieutenant Baron Michael von Godin. The two groups exchanged fire, killing four state police officers and 16 Nazis. [ Shirer 1960 73–74 ] { Richard Huber, photographer. } { Picture of memorial plaque in Munich on the } { German Wikipedia. } This was the origin of the Blutfahne (blood-flag). Hitler and Göring were both injured. A bullet killed Scheubner-Richter. { Hitler Sites by Steven Lehrer. McFarland &amp; Co, Publishers, ISBN 0-7864-1045-0 } Göring was shot in the groin but escaped. The rest of the Nazis scattered or were arrested. Hitler was arrested two days later. In a description of Ludendorff&apos;s funeral at the Feldherrenhalle in 1937 (which Hitler attended but without speaking) William L. Shirer wrote: &quot; The World War [One] hero [Ludendorff] had refused to have anything to do with him [Hitler] ever since he had fled from in front of the Feldherrnhalle after the volley of bullets during the Beer Hall Putsch. &quot; However, it should be noted that when a consignment of papers relating to Landsberg prison, including the visitor book, were later sold at auction it was noted that Ludendorff had visited Hitler a number of times. The case of the resurfacing papers was reported in Der Spiegel ( &quot; The Mirror &quot;, German newspaper) on 23 June 2006 and somewhat contradicts Shirer&apos;s rather sweeping statement. { Der Spiegel 23rd June 2006 } [ Shirer 1960 312 ] [ Counterattack ] State Police and Police units were first notified of trouble by three police detectives stationed at the Löwenbräukeller. These reports reached Major Sigmund von Imhoff of the State police. He immediately called all his green police units and had them seize the central telegraph office and the telephone exchange, although his most important act was to notify Major General Jakob Ritter von Danner, the Reichswehr city commandant of Munich. As a staunch aristocrat, he loathed the &quot; little corporal &quot; and those &quot; Freikorps bands of rowdies &quot;. He also did not much like his commanding officer, Generalleutnant Otto von Lossow, &quot; a sorry figure of a man &quot;. He was determined to put down the putsch with or without von Lossow. Ritter von Danner set up a command post at the 19th Infantry Regiment barracks and alerted all military units. Meanwhile, Captain Karl Wild, learning of the putsch from marchers, mobilized his command to guard von Kahr&apos;s government building, the Commissariat, with orders to shoot. Around 11:00 p.m., Ritter von Danner, along with fellow officers General Adolf Ritter von Ruith and General Friedrich Freiherr Kress von Kressenstein, compelled von Lossow to repudiate the putsch. There was one member of the cabinet who was not at the Bürgerbräukeller: Franz Matt, the vice-premier and minister of education and culture. A staunchly conservative Catholic, he was having dinner with the Archbishop of Munich, Cardinal Michael von Faulhaber and the Nuncio to Bavaria, Archbishop Eugenio Pacelli (who would later become Pope Pius XII ), when he learned of the putsch. He immediately telephoned von Kahr. When he found the man vacillating and unsure, Matt decisively began plans to set up a rump government-in-exile in Regensburg and composed a proclamation calling upon all police, armed forces, and civil servants to remain loyal to the government. The action of these few men spelled doom for the putschists. On Wednesday, 3,000 students from Munich University rioted and marched to the Feldherrnhalle to lay wreaths. (They continued to riot through Friday until learning of Hitler&apos;s arrest.) Von Kahr and von Lossow were called Judases and traitors. [ Trial and prison ] Defendants in the Beer Hall Putsch trial. From left to right: Pernet, Weber, Frick, Kiebel, Ludendorff, Hitler, Bruckner, Röhm, and Wagner. Note that only two of the defendants (Hitler and Frick) were dressed in civilian clothing. Two days after the putsch, Hitler was arrested and charged with high treason in the special People&apos;s Court. [ Der Hitler-Prozeß vor dem Volksgericht in München The Hitler Trial Before the People&apos;s Court in Munich 1924 ] Some of his fellow conspirators were arrested while others escaped to Austria (Hermann Göring, Ernst Hanfstaengl, Rudolf Hess). [ http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/239310/Hermann-Goring Hermann Goring (German minister) - Britannica Online Encyclopedia Britannica.com 2011-03-26 ] The Nazi Party headquarters were raided, and its newspaper, the Völkischer Beobachter (The People&apos;s Observer), was banned. This, however, was not the first time Hitler had been in trouble with the law. In an incident in September 1921, he and some SA had disrupted a meeting of the Bayernbund, and the Nazis who had gone there to cause trouble were arrested as a result. Hitler had ended up serving a little over a month of a three-month jail sentence. Presiding Judge Georg Neithardt was judge in both Hitler cases. { Harold J. Gordon Jr., The Hitler Trial Before the People&apos;s Court in Munich (Arlington, VA: University Publications of America 1976) } His trial began on 26 February 1924 and would last until 1 April 1924. [ Press and politics in the Weimar Republic Bernhard Fulda 2009 68–69 Oxford University Press 978-0-19-954778-4 http://books.google.com/books?id%3DStNY-71yVXQC%26amp%3Bpg%3DPA68 ] Hitler moderated his tone for the trial, centering his defense on his selfless devotion to the good of the Volk and the need for bold action to save them, dropping his usual anti-Semitism. { Claudia Koonz, The Nazi Conscience, p 21 ISBN 0-674-01172-4 } He claimed the putsch had been his sole responsibility and inspiring the title Führer. { Piers Brendon, The Dark Valley: A Panorama of the 1930s, p38 ISBN 0-375-40881-9 } Hitler and Hess were both sentenced to five years in Festungshaft (literally fortress confinement—imprisonment) for treason. Festungshaft was a type of jail that excluded forced labour, featured reasonably comfortable cells, and allowed the prisoner to receive visitors almost daily for many hours. It was the customary sentence for people whom the judge believed to have had honourable but misguided motives. { Claudia Koonz, The Nazi Conscience, p 22 ISBN 0-674-01172-4 } However, Hitler used his trial as an opportunity to spread his ideas. Every word he spoke was reported in the newspaper the next day. The judges were impressed (Presiding Judge Neithardt was inclined to favouritism towards the defendants prior to the trial), and as a result Hitler only served a little over eight months and was fined 500RM(Reichmarks). Due to his story that he was there by accident, which he had also used in the Kapp Putsch along with his war service and connections, Ludendorff was acquitted. Both Röhm and Dr. Wilhelm Frick, though found guilty, were released. Göring, meanwhile, suffered bullet wounds in his leg and groin, which led him to become increasingly dependent on morphine and other painkilling drugs. This addiction continued through to the end of his life. Though Hitler failed to achieve his immediate stated goal, the event did give the Nazis their first exposure to national attention and a propaganda victory. { Claudia Koonz, The Nazi Conscience, p 24 ISBN 0-674-01172-4 } While serving his prison sentence at Landsberg am Lech, he and Rudolf Hess wrote Mein Kampf. Also, the putsch changed Hitler&apos;s outlook on violent revolution to effect change. From then on he thought that, in order to win the German heart, he must do everything by the book, strictly legal. Later on, the German people would call him Hitler Legalité or Hitler the Legal One. [ April 2010 ] The process of combination, where the conservative-nationalist-monarchist group thought that they could piggyback on to and control the National Socialist movement to garner the seats of power, was to repeat itself 10 years later in 1933 when Franz von Papen would legally ask Hitler to form a government. [ Fatalities ] [ Nazis who died in the Putsch ] [ 20em ] Felix Allfarth Andreas Bauriedl Theodor Casella William Ehrlich Martin Faust Anton Hechenberger Oskar Körner Karl Kuhn Karl Laforce Kurt Neubauer Klaus von Pape Theodor von der Pfordten Johann Rickmers Max Erwin von Scheubner-Richter Lorenz Ritter von Stransky Wilhelm Wolf According to Ernst Röhm in his book &quot; Die Geschichte eines Hochverräters &quot; (Franz Eher Verlag, Munich 1928), Martin Faust and Theodor Casella, both members of the armed militia organisation Reichskriegsflagge, were shot down accidentally in a burst of machine gun fire during the occupation of the War Ministry as the result of a misunderstanding with II/Inf.Regt 19. [ Bavarian police who died in the Putsch ] Friedrich Fink Nikolaus Hollweg Max Schobert Rudolf Schraut [ Martyrdom ] The &apos;&apos;Ehrentempel&apos;&apos; The 16 fallen were regarded as the first &quot; blood martyrs &quot; of the NSDAP and were remembered by Hitler in the foreword of Mein Kampf. The Nazi flag they carried, which in the course of events had been stained with blood, came to be known as the Blutfahne (blood flag) and was brought out for the swearing-in of new recruits in front of the Feldherrnhalle when Hitler was in power. Shortly after he came to power, a memorial was placed at the south side of the Feldherrnhalle crowned with a swastika. The back of the memorial read Und ihr habt doch gesiegt! (And you triumphed nevertheless!). Behind it flowers were laid, and either policemen or the SS stood guard in between a lower plaque. Passers-by were required to give the Hitler salute. The putsch was also commemorated on three sets of stamps. Mein Kampf was dedicated to the fallen and, in the book Ich Kämpfe (given to those joining the party circa 1943), they are listed first even though the book lists hundreds of other dead. The header text in the book read &quot; Though they are dead for their acts they will live on forever. &quot; The army had a division named the Feldherrnhalle regiment, and there was also an SA Feldherrnhalle division. &quot; Die Neunte Elfte &quot; (the &quot; Ninth of the Eleventh &quot; ) became one of the most important dates on the Nazi calendar, especially following the seizure of power in 1933. Annually until the fall of Nazi Germany, the putsch would be commemorated nationwide, with the major events taking place in Munich. On the night of November 8, Hitler would address the Alte Kämpfer (Old Fighters) in the Burgerbraukeller (after 1939, the Löwenbräu, in 1944, the Circus Krone Building ), followed the next day by a re-enactment of the march through the streets of Munich. The event would climax with a ceremony recalling the 16 dead marchers on the Konigsplatz. The anniversary could be a time of tension in Nazi Germany. The ceremony was cancelled in 1934, coming as it did after the so-called Night of the Long Knives. In 1938, it coincided with the Kristallnacht, and in 1939 with the attempted assassination of Hitler by Georg Elser. With the outbreak of war in 1939, security concerns caused the re-enactment of the march to be suspended. It was never resumed. However, Hitler continued to deliver his 8 November speech through 1943. In 1944, Hitler skipped the event and Heinrich Himmler spoke in his place. As the war went on, residents of Munich came increasingly to dread the approach of the anniversary, concerned that the presence of the top Nazi leaders in their city would act as a magnet for Allied bombers. Every Gau (administrative region of Germany) was also expected to hold a small remembrance ceremony. As material given to propagandists said, the 16 fallen were the first losses and the ceremony was an occasion to commemorate everyone who had died for the movement. On 9 November 1935, the dead were taken from their graves and to the Feldherrnhalle. The SA and SS carried them down to the Königplatz, where two Ehrentempel (Honour Temples) had been constructed. In each of the structures eight of the martyrs were interred in a sarcophagus bearing their name. Plaque commemorating policemen In June 1945 the Allied Control Commission removed the bodies from the Ehrentempels and contacted their families. They were given the option of having their loved ones buried in Munich cemeteries in unmarked graves or having them cremated, common practice in Germany for unclaimed bodies. On 9 January 1947, the upper parts of the structures were blown up. Since 1994, a commemorative plaque in the pavement in front of the Feldherrenhalle contains the names of the four Bavarian policemen who died in the fight against the Nazis. The plaque reads: [ Den Mitgliedern der Bayerischen Landespolizei, die beim Einsatz gegen die Nationalsozialistischen Putschisten am 9.11.1923 Ihr Leben liessen.( &quot; To the members of the Bavarian Police, who gave their lives opposing the National Socialist coup on 9 November 1923 &quot; ) ] [ Supporters of the Putsch ] [ Key supporters ] Rudolf Hess, Hermann Göring, Alfred Rosenberg, Erich Ludendorff, Hermann Kriebel, Friedrich Weber, Ernst Röhm, Max Scheubner-Richter, Ulrich Graf, Julius Streicher, Hermann Esser, Ernst Hanfstaengl, Gottfried Feder, Josef Berchtold, Ernst Pöhner, Emil Maurice, Max Amann, Heinz Pernet, Wilhelm Brückner, Lt. Robert Wagner, Adolf Hitler [ Other notable supporters ] Heinrich Himmler, Edmund Heines, Gerhard Rossbach, Hans Frank, Julius Schaub, Walter Hewel, Dietrich Eckart, Wilhelm Frick, Julius Schreck, Josef &apos;Sepp&apos; Dietrich, Philipp Bouhler, Franz Pfeffer von Salomon,Adolf Lenk, Hans Kallenbach, Ernst Rüdiger Starhemberg, Adolf Wagner, Jakob Grimminger, Heinrich Trambauer, Karl Beggel, Rudolf Jung, Rudolf Buttmann, Albrecht von Graefe, Hans Ulrich Klintzsche, Heinrich Hoffmann, Josef Gerum, Capt. Eduard Dietl, Hans Georg Hofmann, Matthaeus Hofmann, Helmut Klotz, Adolf Hühnlein, Max Neunzert, Michael Ried. Karl Fischer von Treuenfeld, Theodor Oberländer and Eleonore Baur [ At the front of the march ] In the vanguard were four flag bearers followed by Adolf Lenk and Kurt Neubauer, Ludendorff&apos;s servant. Behind those two came more flag bearers, then the leadership in two rows. Hitler was in the centre, slouch hat in hand, the collar of his trenchcoat turned up against the cold. To his left, in civilian clothes, a green felt hat, and a loose loden coat, was Ludendorff. To Hitler&apos;s right was Scheubner-Richter. To his right came Alfred Rosenberg. On either side of these men were Ulrich Graf, Hermann Kriebel, Friedrich Weber, Julius Streicher, Hermann Göring, and Wilhelm Brückner. Behind these came the second string of Heinz Pernet, Johann Aigner ( Scheubner-Richter &apos;s servant), Gottfried Feder, Theodor von der Pfordten, Wilhelm Kolb, Rolf Reiner, Hans Streck, and Heinrich Bennecke, Brückner&apos;s adjutant. Behind this row marched the Stosstrupp, the SA, the Infantry School, and the Oberländer. [ Chief defendants in the &apos;Ludendorff-Hitler&apos; Trial ] Heinz Pernet, Friedrich Weber, Wilhelm Frick, Hermann Kriebel,General Erich Ludendorff,Adolf Hitler, Wilhelm Brückner,Ernst Röhm, Lt. Robert Wagner [ See also ] Early timeline of Nazism Timeline of the Weimar Republic [ References ] [ 30em ] [ Bibliography ] [ Kershaw Ian Ian Kershaw Hitler: A Biography W. W. Norton &amp; Company New York 2008 0-393-06757-2 harv ] [ Shirer William L. William L. Shirer The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich Simon &amp; Schuster New York 1960 978-0-671-62420-0 harv ] Dornberg, John. (1982). Munich 1923, The Story of Hitler&apos;s First Grab for Power. New York: Harper &amp; Row. Gordon, Harold J., Jr. (1972) Hitler and the Beer Hall Putsch. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1972 ___. (1976). The Hitler Trial Before the People&apos;s Court in Munich. University Publications of America. Large, David Clay. (1997). Where Ghosts Walked, Munich&apos;s Road to the Third Reich. New York: W.W. Norton. Snyder, Louis Leo. (1961). Hitler and Nazism. New York: Franklin Watts. [ External links ] Map of Europe at time of Beer Hall Putsch at omniatlas.com [ 48.1304 11.592 region:DE_type:event title ] Category:Adolf Hitler Category:Attempted coups Category:1920s coups d&apos;état and coup attempts Category:Conflicts in 1923 Category:Interwar period Category:History of Bavaria Category:History of Munich Category:Nazi Germany Category:Weimar Republic Category:1923 in Germany Category:1924 in Germany Category:20th century in Germany [ fr ] ar:انقلاب بير هول an:Putsch de Múnich az:Pivə qiyamı bg:Бирен пуч bs:Hitler-Ludendorff-puč ca:Putsch de Munic cs:Pivní puč da:Ølkælderkuppet de:Hitlerputsch et:Õllekeldriputš el:Πραξικόπημα της μπιραρίας es:Putsch de Múnich eo:Hitler-puĉo eu:Municheko Putscha fa:کودتای مونیخ fr:Putsch de la Brasserie ko:뮌헨 폭동 hr:Hitlerov puč id:Bierkeller Putsch it:Putsch di Monaco he:הפוטש במרתף הבירה ka:ლუდის პუტჩი lv:Alus pučs lt:Alaus pučas hu:Sörpuccs mk:Хитлер-пуч arz:انقلاب بير هول ms:Beer Hall Putsch nl:Bierkellerputsch ja:ミュンヘン一揆 no:Ølkjellerkuppet pl:Pucz monachijski pt:Putsch da Cervejaria ro:Puciul de la berărie ru:Пивной путч simple:Beer Hall Putsch sr:Пивнички пуч fi:Oluttupavallankaappaus sv:Ölkällarkuppen th:กบฏโรงเบียร์ tr:Birahane darbesi uk:Пивний путч vi:Đảo chính nhà hàng bia zh:啤酒館政變