[ April 2012 ] [ El Salvador ] { El Salvador } { Department } { San Salvador Department } { San Salvador } { Democratic Republic } { Mayor } { Norman Quijano ( } { Alianza Republicana Nacionalista ) } { City } { 1525 } { 72.25 } { 27.9 } { 620.86 } { 239.7 } { 2011 Estimate } { 540,898 } { 7,486.5 } { 19,389.9 } { 2,415,217 } { 3,689.7 } { 9,556.3 } { 540,898 (Municipality) } { Central Standard Time } { -6 } { 13 } { 41 } { 24 } { N } { 89 } { 11 } { 24 } { W } { 658 } { Postal Code } { + 503 } The city of San Salvador (English: &quot; Holy Saviour &quot; ) is the capital city of the Republic of El Salvador. San Salvador is a part of the San Salvador Department, one of fourteen in the nation. [ http://www.geonames.org/SV/largest-cities-in-el-salvador.html Biggest Cities El Salvador Geonames.org February 24, 2012 ] San Salvador is the country&apos;s largest city as well as its most important political, cultural, educational and financial center. { http://hdr.undp.org/docs/reports/national/ELS_El_Salvador/El_Salvador_2003_sp.pdf } [ September 2010 ] As a &quot; gamma &quot; global city, San Salvador is one of the most important financial centers in Central America. [ Bart van Poll http://www.spottedbylocals.com/blog/alpha-beta-and-gamma-cities/ Alpha, Beta and Gamma cities Spottedbylocals.com February 24, 2012 ] It is located in the Salvadoran highlands, surrounded by volcanoes and prone to earthquakes, which is why the Pipil and the Spaniards called the area in which the city is located &quot; el valle de las hamacas &quot; (the valley of the hammocks, &quot; salcoatitan &quot; in Pipil language).The 2009 estimated population for the city proper was around 540,000 people (2.3million metropolitan), making it the third largest Central American city and the second largest metropolitan area. San Salvador is nicknamed &quot; San Sivar &quot; by Salvadorans. [ http://www.mongabay.com/igapo/Central_American_cities.htm#table Largest Cities in Central America Mongabay.com February 24, 2012 ] [ History ] Senorio de Cuzcatlan before Spanish Conquest 1524 San Salvador 1868 Flag Liberty Plaza during the early 1950&apos;s Morazan Plaza in the Historic Downtown early 1950&apos;s Before the Spanish conquest, the Pipil peoples established their capital, Cuzcatlán, near the current location of San Salvador. Not much is known about Cuzcatlán, as it was abandoned by its inhabitants in an effort to avoid Spanish rule. Under the orders of conquistador Pedro de Alvarado, his associates Gonzalo de Alvarado and Diego de Holguín occupied the settlement they found and began to develop it. Diego de Holguín became the first mayor of San Salvador after the town was founded on April 1, 1525. The town changed locations twice, in 1528 and 1545. Originally founded in what is now the archaeological site Ciudad Vieja, north of the present-day city, it was moved to the Valle de Las Hamacas or the Acelhuate Valley, named so due to the intense seismic activity that characterizes it. The new site was chosen as it had more space and more fertile land, thanks to the Acelhuate River. The population of the city remained relatively small until the early twentieth century. During the presidency of Dr. Rafael Zaldivar on January 1885, businessmen and the president&apos;s family built the Sara Zaldivar Asylum for Indigents and the Elderly. In 1902, Hospital Rosales was built, named after its benefactor, Dr. Jose Rosales, a banker who gave his fortune to the hospital and to the orphanage. The hospital&apos;s construction was begun by president Carlos Ezeta and finished during the presidency of Tomás Regalado. In 1905 president Pedro José Escalón began construction of the National Palace, funded by coffee exportation taxes. In 1911, the Monumento a los Próceres de 1811 (monument to the heroes of 1811) in Plaza Libertad and the Teatro Nacional were built during Dr. Manuel Enrique Araujo&apos;s presidency. In 1917, an earthquake damaged the capital during the Carlos Melendez presidency. This earthquake was caused by the eruption of the San Salvador Volcano, but the city escaped additional damage because the lava flowed down the back side of the volcano. On December 2, 1931, after a coup d&apos;état, president Arturo Araujo was ousted by the military and replaced by a military directorate. The directorate named then vice-president Maximiliano Hernández Martínez as president and Araujo went into exile. The Martínez regime lasted from December 4, 1931 to May 6, 1944. In 1964, the Christian Democratic Party (PDC) candidate, José Napoleon Duarte, an engineer, was elected mayor. Duarte was Mayor of San Salvador from 1964 to 1970. During his term as mayor he built the Pancho Lara park in the Vista Hermosa neighborhood, renewed the electricity system, and began a system of adult education schools. The 1960s to 1980s were the golden age of San Salvador in all regards: security, quality of life, and modernization. Today the tallest building in the country has 28 floors and is 110 meteres high. In the 1980s, at the commencement of the civil war, many modernization projects were halted because of the outbreak of the war. Examples of suspended projects include a 40 story high government building approximately 160 meters in height, and the Sheraton Hotel Tower a 26 story high building with a rotating restaurant on top. In 1969, celebrations in the Cuscatlán stadium were held in honor of the returning troops from the football war with Honduras. Boulevard de los Héroes (Boulevard of the Heroes) was named after the Salvadoran soldiers who fought in Honduras. The 1986 San Salvador earthquake destroyed many government buildings and other important structures, injuring and killing hundreds. Thousands of people were displaced by the disaster and many found shelter in the ruins. In 1986, Mayor Morales Ehrlich closed streets in the downtown area of the city to create a large market, which has resulted in major traffic congestion affecting the area ever since. The Chapultepec Peace Accords were signed on Thursday, January 16, 1992, ending 22 years of civil war, and are celebrated as a national holiday with people flooding downtown San Salvador in Plaza Gerardo Barrios and in La Libertad Park. [ Municipal government ] San Salvador City as darkness descends on the greater metropolitan area. Cities in El Salvador, by constitutional provision (Art. 203), are economically and administratively autonomous. San Salvador is governed by a council consisting of a mayor (elected by direct vote every three years, with an option to be re-elected), a trustee and two or more aldermen whose number varies in proportion to the population of the municipality. The mayor as of 2011 is Norman Quijano of the Nationalist Republican Alliance party. He is accompanied by a trustee, twelve aldermen, four substitute aldermen, and a secretary. The functions and powers of this government are framed within the rules of the Municipal Code. San Salvador&apos;s government is composed of various departments, including the departments of festivals, parks, cemeteries, and finance. To safeguard the interests of the municipality, there is a board of metropolitan agents. Each of the six city districts also has a government department. The mayor is a member of the Council of Mayors of the Metropolitan Area of San Salvador (COAMSS), composed of fourteen local councils that make up the area known as Greater San Salvador. Satellite image of Great San Salvador City. East of the city (right) is lake Ilopango, and to the west (left) San Salvador volcano. The pacific Central American coast beaches lay just south (bottom) of the city [ City mayors since 1964 ] José Napoleón Duarte (1964–1970) Carlos Antonio Herrera Rebollo (1970–1974) José Antonio Morales Ehrlich (1974–1976) Alejandro Duarte (1982–1985) José Antonio Morales Ehrlich (1985–1988) Armando Calderón Sol (1988–1994) Mario Valiente (1994–1997) Héctor Silva Arguello (1997–2003) Carlos Rivas Zamora (2003–2006) Violeta Menjívar(2006–2009) Norman Quijano (2009–2012) Norman Quijano (2012–2015) Reelected Mayor [ Sub-division and projects ] The San Salvador Municipality is divided into Districts. Currently the city has six Districts, District 1 (Downtown), District 2 (Colonia Miramonte, Centro America, Satellite, and Miralvalle), District 3 (Colonia Escalon, and San Benito), District 4 (Colonia La Cima, y San Francisco), District 5 (San Jacinto, Málaga, Monseratt), and District 6 (Colonia Don Bosco). [ City symbols ] { Monumento al Divino Salvador del Mundo at Plaza El Salvador del mundo (The Savior of the World Plaza) in San Salvador, during full moon midnight } { Monumento al Divino Salvador del Mundo. The monument is used as an symbolic iconic landmark to represent both El Salvador and Salvadorans world wide. } The symbols of the city are the shield, flag, anthem, and staff. The first three were created as a result of a contest launched in 1943. The shield (designed by the painter José Mejía Vides) shows four quadrants: the two quadrants at the top right and bottom left oblique carry the blue and white (representing the national flag), the top left frame displays an emerald necklace, symbol, and the lower right shows the bell of the Church of La Merced, which represents the beginning of San Salvador&apos;s independence movement in 1811, when José Matías Delgado rang the bells. The flag was designed at the request of the authorities. The anthem was written by Carlos Bustamante (lyrics) and Ciriaco de Jesus Wings (music). The municipal staff shows a series of figures and symbols relating to local history. From top to bottom these images are: a native Amerindian, first mayor Don Diego de Olguín, Carlos V of Spain, the Royal Decree which named San Salvador, Mayor Don Antonio Gutierrez, priest José Matías Delgado, the seal of liberation of 1811, the 1821 independence seal, the shield of the Municipal Freedom Union, the national emblem, and God. [ Demographics ] Years Population(AMSS) 1900 138.200 1910 178.200 1920 205.000 1930 191.100 1940 222.500 1950 296.000 1960 475.300 Years Population 1970 731.000 1980 979.700 1990 1.300.000 2000 1.400.000 2005 1.566.713 2007 1.860.000 2009 2.177.432 2011(estimate) 2.500.000 Spanish is the language spoken by virtually all inhabitants. The capital city of San Salvador has a540,898 people. [ Religion ] Transfiguration of Divino Salvador del Mundo { Mormon Temple SUD of El Salvador } There is a great diversity of religion within the city, but the vast majority of the population are Roman Catholic or Protestant. As in much of the country, Roman Catholicism plays a prominent role, and the city celebrates two important Catholic festivals &quot; La Fiesta de Agosto &quot;, centered around Jesus Christ, and &quot; Salvador del Mundo &quot;. Celebrated priest Óscar Romero was the archbishop of San Salvador at the time of his assassination. The current archbishop of El Salvador is José Luis Escobar Alas. Protestants account for around 39% of San Salvador&apos;s population. One of the largest Protestant churches in the city is the Centro Internacional de Alabanza, another is the Tabernaculo Biblico Bautista Amigos de Israel. The city also has a synagogue in the San Benito neighborhood which services the Jewish community. A newly built LDS temple is a marvel of engineering and architecture, and there are smaller LDS chapels in District 1 and 3. The city has a small Arab population but they do not practice Islam, since most are Christian Arabs from Palestine. The city also has Korean Evangelical Churches that give services in Korean language. [ Culture ] San Salvador is a culturally rich city. Its historical downtown area contains some of the most beautiful architecture in town. The National Theater is an important historical feature: recently remodeled, it was originally built in 1866. The National Palace still has its original facade, which combines neoclassic, neolithic and renaissance architectural styles. Other important sites include El Salvador&apos;s Art Museum (Museo de Arte de El Salvador, MARTE), the National Museum David J. Guzmán, the Luis Poma&apos;s Theater, and the museum for children, Tin Marin. In 2011, the Union of Ibero-American Capital Cities (UCCI), selected San Salvador as &quot; Latin American capital of culture &quot;, [ February 2012 ] recognizing San Salvador&apos;s cultural diversity. The city government is restoring the downtown area, with the goal of celebrating the city&apos;s past, and promoting cultural diversity. [ Geography ] San Salvador Skyline, Panoramic Picture taken from the San Salvador Volcano The city&apos;s average elevation is 560  meters above sea level. The highest regions are the foothills of the Quezaltepec, or San Salvador, volcano, where elevations are approximately 1000  meters above sea level. East of the city lies Lake Illopango, the largest volcanic lake in the nation. { San Salvador, the Capital of El Salvador – AlfaTravelGuide.com } Astronaut View of San Salvador [ Climate ] Roble Tower in San Salvador National Palace of El Salvador is located in the Historic Center of the City of San Salvador. San Salvador features a tropical wet and dry climate under the Köppen climate classification. San Salvador is mainly hot, the coolest months being November through February. The temperature varies widely between midday and midnight, due to changing levels of humidity throughout the day. The highest reading ever recorded in San Salvador was [ 38.5 °C °F ], the lowest was [ 8.2 °C °F ]. The highest dew point was [ 27 °C °F ] and the lowest [ -10 °C °F ]. San Salvador has two seasons: rainy and dry. The dry season lasts from November through April, and the rainy From May through October.Sometimes, when strong cold fronts affect El Salvador during the dry season, the dew point may fall to temperatures below 10  °C, an event that would be too cold for most of the inhabitants, but this rarely has any effect due to the fact that humidity remains low, which means the dew point remains less relevant, therefore a 7  °C-10  °C dew point is actually felt as a 15  °C-18  °C temperature. { Average Weather for San Salvador, * – Temperature and Precipitation } { Servicio de Informacion Meteorologica Mundial – San Salvador } { Weather Information for San Salvador } { June 5, 2010 } { August 2010 } [ Topography ] Ilopango lake and San Salvador in the distance, view from Cojutepeque The City of San Salvador is situated in a valley between hills, mountains, a volcano, and a caldera lake. The highest point in the city is Cerro El Picacho with a height of 1960 meters (6430  feet). The Picacho is connected to the San Salvador (volcano). The volcano itself is not within the city of San Salvador, but rather is within the municipality of Santa Tecla. The highest point of the volcano is 1893 meters (6211  feet). Another important peak within the municipality is San Jacinto Hill, with a height of 1162 meters (3812  feet), which separates the Municipality of San Salvador from San Marcos. Other notable hills include Cerro Chantecuán, La Torre, and Candelaria. Another important peak is La Cima, at 960 meters (3021  feet) which has been built-up over 85% of its total area, composed mostly of residences with a panoramic view of all San Salvador. Within the urban portion of the city, the highest point is Colonia Escalon in District 3, at 1003 meters (3290  feet), and the lowest point is in District One below the Historic Downtown, Colonia San Esteban, at 645 meters (2016  feet). The topography of the urban area is generally very hilly. Soil types include regosol, latosol, andosol, lava rocks and andesitic and basaltic lava. [ Bodies of water ] The main river in San Salvador is the Rio Acelhuate which is 2.2  km long. The river used to serve as a water source to San Salvador during the late 1800s and early 1900s but now due to urbanization the river today is very polluted. Within the city there are no major bodies of water, except for some small streams and old aqueduct systems. The city borders Ilopango which has one of the largest lakes in the country, the Ilopango Lake. The lake is only 17  km / 10 miles away from downtown San Salvador. [ Economy ] San Salvador WTC San Salvador at dusk Office building complex near El Salvador del mundo plaza. { TCS, in San Salvador } [ Financial sector ] As the capital, San Salvador supports many commercial activities, such as food and beverage production, handicrafts, construction materials, pharmaceutical and chemical industries, automobiles, and appliances repair. Grupo TACA, a multinational consortium which includes the national airline of El Salvador, Costa Rica, and other Central American countries, has its headquarters in San Salvador. Other companies with headquarters in San Salvador include Unicomer Group, Almacenes Simán, Grupo Roble, Grupo Real, Excel Automotríz, and Grupo Q. Banks in San Salvador include Banco Agrícola, Citibank, HSBC, Scotiabank, BAC-Credomatic, Banco Promérica, Banco Pro-Credit and the Mexican Banco Azteca. Important insurance companies include Asesuisa, SISA, Mapfre-La Centroamericana and Scotia Seguros are also located in San Salvador. Major department stores in San Salvador include Almacenes Simán, and Sears, Walmart, La Despensa de Don Juan, Super Selectos, and PriceSmart. The city&apos;s financial businesses are not located in the historic downtown region, but are spread throughout the other districts in the city, particularly in District 2 and District 3. World Trade Center (District 3) The World Trade Center of San Salvador is located in District 3 (Colonia Escalon) on 87th Avenue North and Mirador Street. The World Trade Center offers some of the best office locations in the country: connected to two hotels (one of which is the Crowne Plaza Hotel), a convention center and a commercial center containing retail shops and restaurants. World Trade Center San Salvador is a unique concept { http://www.torrefutura.com/homeeng } due to the integration of its component elements. Since their completion, the first two towers have maintained a 100 percent occupancy rate with multinational companies, embassies, and firms such as Banco Multisectorial de Inversiones (BMI), Ericsson, Continental Airlines, Microsoft, Inter-American Development Bank, and Banco Promérica. Centro Financiero Gigante (District 2) Centro Financiero Gigante { Es.wikipedia.org } { February 24, 2012 } is a complex of office buildings located in San Salvador, El Salvador. It has five towers: one with seven floors, another with 10, another with 12, another with 14 and the highest 19 floors, the tallest tower measures 77 meters (252.6  ft) high. Centro Financiero Gigante is a phased project which began with the construction of two towers. After several years the number of buildings has increased, and it has become one of the most significant business complexes in San Salvador. The tallest tower in the financial center is occupied by the phone company Telefonica, The next tallest tower is used by RED (Business Communication Systems). The complex also includes the Banco Azteca center, Stream Global Services that represent Dell in Central America, The Israeli Embassy of San Salvador, Tigo, call centers, and some other small offices and banks. The complex was built in phases. In 1997 the project started with Phase I which consisted of the two tallest towers, then a seven story-high tower was built in Phase II, for the old Dell company in Central America, Phase III the buildings for Tigo a 12 story-high and Telemovil a 10-story-high building. The final phase was remodeling of the Telemovil Building to turn into Banco Azteca Center. Alameda Manuel Enrique Araujo and Zona Rosa (District 3) Along Alameda Manuel Enrique Araujo there are many businesses, banks, and financial centers, government institutions and museums, such as: AFP Confia, Superior Council of Public Health, HSBC Central Office, AFP Crecer, Ministry of Public Works, Centro Internacional de Feria y Convenciones (International Center of Fairs and Conventions), Presidential Palace, Museo de Antropolgia David J. Guzman (Anthropology Museum), Banco Promerica Financial Center, Ministry of Tourism, Channel 2 &amp; 4 Studio Center, Channel 6 Studio Center, CAESS-Centro Intregal al Servicio al cliente. In Zona Rosa there are luxury hotels and museums. A business center is under construction which will a tower for business, a tower for a hotel, and a shopping center, all three connecting to the main street in the Zona Rosa. Along Zona Rosa there are several embassies, including the embassies of Chile, Taiwan, Mexico, Spain, Italy, Brazil and Israel. [ Communications ] [ Telecommunications in El Salvador ] San Salvador is home to many communication company headquarters. A relatively large proportion of residents have access to the internet, telephone, and television. The most popular communication companies in El Salvador are Tigo, Claro -Telecom, Movistar -Telefonica, and Digicel. All of these companies provide 3G networks, Cable TV, Internet and International Roaming. El Salvador&apos;s television stations are mostly based in San Salvador. Stations in San Salvador include the following: YSTV channel 2, also known as Teledos; one of the stations of Telecorporación Salvadoreña (TCS). YSU4 channel 4, also known as Canal Cuatro; another station of Telecorporación Salvadoreña. YSWA channel 6, also known as Canal Seis; another station of Telecorporación Salvadoreña. YSWE channel 8, broadcasting a service known as Ágape TV. YSWD-TV channel 10, an educational television station. TV Doce channel 12, broadcasting a service known as Telesistema. Channel 15, a station of MTV Networks Latin America. CF 17, an independent religious television station owned by one of the most famous churches in the country. Canal 19 (channel 19), broadcasting Nickelodeon Latin America. Canal 21 (channel 21), broadcasting Telemundo. Musica a Colores channel 23, an independent station broadcasting music videos. Fundación Canal 25 (channel 25), broadcasting Trinity Broadcasting Network. Canal 27 (channel 27), an independent religious television station. UTEC channel 33. VTV channel 35; another station of Telecorporación Salvadoreña. Canal Católico channel 57, a religious television station operated by the Roman Catholic Church. CJC channel 65. TCI channel 67. [ Retail shopping ] Also the most popular retail companies are Walmart, La Despensa de Don Juan, Super Selectos and PriceSmart [ Landmarks and buildings ] The Complete Skyline as 2011 105 campestre In contrast to many other cities, the financial center of San Salvador is not located downtown, but at the periphery, towards the northwestern sections of the city. Downtown or &quot; Old &quot; San Salvador possesses many historical buildings, including the National Palace, the National Theatre, the Plaza Libertad, and the Cathedral. Due to continuous seismic activity, downtown San Salvador currently has no major high rise buildings. However, modern building technology is allowing the construction of taller earthquake-resistant buildings in San Salvador. The rest of the city has undergone a major change of skyline following the year 2008, with many projects completed or underway. Torre Futura, or World Trade Center San Salvador, is the most modern facility in Central America. Its completion in 2009 marked the start of a new era for the financial sector in El Salvador. [ District 1 ] Historic Downtown District 1 Torre de Gobernacion District 1 [ San Salvador Historic Downtown ] District 1 is the historical center of the capital city. The original buildings of the Spanish colonial era have been mostly destroyed by natural disasters. Notable surviving buildings were erected in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. This district was long the center of political, economic and religious country. The earthquake of 1986 severely damaged the area and due to rising unemployment in the country has been occupied by a large quantity of street vendors and other informal trade. The tallest buildings in district one are the government center buildings. The tallest building is 14 stories and 65 meters of height. The tallest structure is not a building, but rather the cathedral&apos;s bell tower, which is approximately 80 meters in height. [ District 2 ] A view of District 2 District 2 Skyline District two { http://www.cideu.org/_data/adjuntos_imagen/9233.jpg } is mostly residential. The northern portion has a slower pace, with few traffic jams. District 2 has a long history. During the 1980s, construction in this area was originally intended to be the focal point for the modernization of San Salvador, but due to the outbreak of civil war, many of these projects where cancelled. The planned New Government Center, was to have a 40 story office complex. This and other facilities close by, including for medical facilities, were never built. Although the projected growth in the area never reached it&apos;s predicted potential, some other projects were completed during this time. Grupo Roble opened the Metrocentro Project a mall which was the largest at its time and today still is the largest in Central America. This project has a Mall, Hotel, Small Business Plaza with the company headquarters tower, that is know today a Torre Roble a 14 story and 56 meter high tower. Long after the civil war, the Centro Financiero Gigante Project along the Plaza Las Americas was started, which consisted of four phases one with the two main towers and three phases with other small. Around Salvador del Mundo or Plaza Las Americas many business and banking headquarters have opened, such as Banco Agricola Headquarters, AFP Confia, Torre Montecristo and the Centro Finaciero Gigante that hold the companies of Tigo, Telefónica, RED, Banco Azteca and the Israeli Embassy. [ District 3 ] Alisios 115 Apartment Tower in District 3 District 3 San Benito Plaza Futura Fountain District 3 is undergoing a building boom, with many highrises recently completed, and many more under constructions. District 3 is the district with the greatest economic activity. Torre Futura World trade center is the tallest building in San Salvador and second tallest building in the country at 99 meters and 19 stories. Another building that is currently under construction and will be opened in October 2011 [ 2011 10 31 ] is the Alisios 115 Apartment Tower at 96 meters and 26 stories high. The Alisios tower is located in the Zona Rosa, a key location in the city. Next to this building two additional towers, 24 stories and 92 meters high, will be built. Campestre 105 Towers I, II, and III stand on the top of the Masferrer Roundabout Plaza, the tallest tower with 24 stories and 79.5 meters in height followed by its sister towers with respective floor count of 21 and 13. Next to the Campestre 105 stand the Terra Alta Apartment Tower, with 26 stories and 90 meters in height, The Hilton Hotel is another standing out building in the skyline. Next to the Zona Rosa lies the San Benito Apartment Area, where various projects like La Capilla 525, La Capillas 515, La Capilla 370, La Strada, and La Castella, are the main apartment tower complexes. A project that are still under consideration is The Agrisal Tower Business Cneter, a 25 story high corporate tower connected to a hotel tower and a shopping center. District 3 includes the International Center of Convention and Fairs, the National Museum of Anthropology, and almost all embassies. District 3 is the safest district, and the district with the most tourism activity. This district has many monuments, government buildings, and banking buildings, such as El Salvador del Mundo (officially known as Plaza Las Americas), Ministry of Public Works, Ministry of Tourism, HSBC Center, AFP Crecer. District 3 Is home for most embassies like the embassies of Italy, Spain, Mexico, Taiwan (El Salvador established relationships with Taiwan rather than China), Chile, Argentina, Peru, Colombia, Ecuador, Japan, Brazil, and many others. District 3 is home of many shopping centers such as Plaza Basilea, and Plaza Zona Rosa, El Paseo, and Galerias. The shopping centers include many international stores from companies based in North America and Europe. [ http://www.sansalvador.gob.sv/?page_id%3D199 Alcaldia Municipalidad de San Salvador Sansalvador.gob.sv February 24, 2012 ] [ District 4 ] District 4 is composed of three main neighborhoods, La Cima (I, II, &amp; III), Colonia Militar, and Colonia San Francisco. The ridgeline in this area contains residential neighborhoods for the upper-middle class and upper classes, many of which are mansions. The RN-5, a major highway in the city, runs thru this district. Alongside RN-5 is the Torre Cuscatlán, a tower that has 19 floors and two underground parking levels and a height of 79 meters. For many years it was the tallest building in the city, and it is now named Torre Citibank. The Torre Citi has been standing by itself for 30 years. There has been some construction projects near the building in the 1980s, but they were canceled because of the Civil War, and later projects were cancelled in 2009 because of the economic recession. A major landmark in district 4 is the Cuscatlán Stadium which is the largest stadium in Central America with a capacity of over 35,000. [ District 5 ] District 5 contains mostly middle class and lower-middle class homes, and also includes the National Zoo. District 5 borders San Marcos on the East. District 5 has a relatively high crime rate. The residential part of District 5, known as Los Planes de Renderos, contains many upper-middle class residences and vacation homes. Many tourists visit this district for its eating experiences, particularly its numerous pupuserias. District 5 has many viewpoints which look out over San Salvador and other cities beyond, [ http://maps.google.com/ Google Maps Google January 1, 1970 February 24, 2012 ] such as San Marcos, Mejicanos, and Ciudad Delgado. [ District 6 ] Is the smallest district in San Salvador, most of its skyline is homes, for the middle-low class, the district is known to be quite dangerous. The most outstanding mark is the San Jacinto Hill, The Old Presidential House used to be in District 6. This district also borders Soyapango on the east, and Ciudad Delgado on the North. [ Tallest buildings ] Escalon San Salvador&apos;s metropolitan area has Central America&apos;s (excluding Panama) tallest high rise buildings.It has 12 of the 25 highest buildings in the region. Below is a list of the 10 tallest buildings in the San Salvador Municipality 1st – Torre Futura or Torre 3 at the World Trade Center 99.0 meters/324.8 feet 2nd – Alisios 115 under construction, but achieved its final height 92.0 meters/301 feet 3rd – Terra Alta Apartments 90.0 meters/295 feet 4th – 105 Campestre Torre A 79.65 meters/257 feet 5th – Torre Cuscatlán Citi-Bank Tower or Torre Democracia 79 meters/259.1 feet 6th – Centro Financiaro Gigante(CFG) 77.0 meters/252.6 feet 7th – 105 Campestre Torre B 73.25 meters/240 feet 8th – Torre 525 Avenida La Capilla 71.0 meters/232.9 feet 9th – Ministerio de Gobernacion 65 meters/213.2 feet 10th – Torre 515 Avenida La Capilla 64 meters/209 feet 11th – Hilton Princess San Salvador Hotel 55 meters/180 Within the Metropolitan Area of San Salvador in Antiguo Cuscaltan 1st* – El Pedregal also known as Multiplaza Apartamentos 110.3 meters/361.8 feet 10th* – Edificio Avante 67.1 meters/220.1 feet Planned Europlaza Busines Center approximate heights – Tower 1: 150meters/492 feet; 2 130meters/426 feet; 3 117meters/383feet; 4 100meters/328feet Las Magnolias 159 two towers of approximately- 88 meters/290 feet each Agrisal Complex two towers approximate heights – 95 meters/310 feet and 60 meters/190 feet Torre El Pedregal 1 Torre Futura 2 Alisios 115 3 105 Campestre Tower A Citi-Bank Tower Terra Alta Apartments Telefonica Tower (right of Red Tower) 105 Campestre Tower B 525 Avenida La Capilla Edificio Avante Government Center Tower 4 &lt; /center &gt; [ Urban development ] right Tranquil street at San Benito Neighborhood Early colonial developments failed to anticipate the extensive growth of the city in the following centuries. Thus, the city contains many narrow streets which create traffic problems, and sidewalks are often overcrowded. As the expansion of San Salvador continues, the need for infrastructure improvements becomes more acute. During the 1960s, urban expansion was most prevalent in the northern and southern parts of the city, while the 1970s saw growth continue further south, north and west. Colonias Miravalle, Montebello, Satellite, Maquilishuat, San Mateo Lomas de San Francisco, Alta Mira, Loma Linda, La Floresta, and Jardines de la Libertad were built during this period. The expansion of San Salvador during this period, while in all directions, was primarily in the direction of the volcano of San Salvador. The increased demand for housing was due to an increase of the numbers of middle class, military, and professionals. Around 2000, the city expansion westward slowed. There was an expansion of middle-class neighborhoods such as Merliot, Santa Elena and the Tier, but the product of internal migration and cessation of armed conflict created a high demand for urban public housing. This gave rise to large urban development projects mostly to the east and north, to the phenomenon of &quot; dormitory towns &quot;, and to a disorderly growth pattern. [ AMSS (San Salvador Metropolitan Area) ] { Monumento al Divino Salvador del Mundo plaza } Cathedral de Nuestra Señora del Carmen in downtown Santa Tecla San Salvador, founded in the year 1525, was the second city in Central America established by the Spanish colonizers. When El Salvador became independent in 1821, San Salvador had a population of 10,000. A large migration of rural residents to the capital led to a population of 25,000 in 1825. There would be two such migrations in San Salvador&apos;s history. San Salvador was largely destroyed by an earthquake in 1854, leading to the creation of a new city, Santa Tecla, which served as the temporary capital from 1854 to 1859, until San Salvador was rebuilt. The continued development of San Salvador was spurred by the success of the local coffee industry, and it became a very productive commercial city. By 1890 San Salvador had 94,580 Inhabitants. In 1901 San Salvador was composed of the Urban Center (population 80,167), Vista Hermosa (13,123), y Planes de Rendero (1,560). In the following years San Salvador expanded towards the volcano. In the 1970s the city leaped in population from 430,500 to 700,000. As San Salvador grew, it merged with neighboring cities, forming the Metropolitan Area of San Salvador (AMSS). The AMSS is a conglomerate of 14 municipalities. It was instituted in 1993, through Legislative Decree No. 732 of the Law on Territorial Development and the Metropolitan Area of San Salvador and neighboring municipalities. The Act stipulates that the constituent cities form a single urban unit. Since 1990, due to the rapid growth of San Salvador and the neighboring municipalities, the government established initiatives to plan and guide the development of the metropolis. The AMSS is the heart of the country&apos;s political, financial, economic and cultural life. It accounts for 27% of the population and 70% of the public and private investment, in only 3% of the national territory. Together the fourteen municipalities give the AMSS a total population of 2,177,432 inhabitants (2009 census). The Government expects a total population of 2.5 million by the year 2011. List of municipalities in AMSS(Distance from San Salvador District 1 to other city downtown): San Salvador Antiguo Cuscatlán – 8.5  km (5.4  mi) Highest HDI in El Salvador and Central America Santa Tecla – 11  km (6.8  mi) southwest San Marcos – 5.5  km (3.3  mi) south Soyapango – 5  km (3  mi) east Ilopango – 10  km (6.2  mi) east San Martin – 18  km (11.2  mi) east Tonacatepeque – 30  km (25  mi) north east Ciudad Delgado – 4.5  km (2.8  mi) north east Cuscatancingo – 5  km (3  mi) north Mejicanos - 8.5  km (5.4  mi) north Apopa – 13.5  km (8.5  mi) north Nejapa - 20  km (12.5  mi) north Ayutuxtepeque – 7  km (4.5  mi) north [ Tourism and sites of interest ] [ Historic Downtown ] [ San Salvador Historic Downtown ] The historic center of San Salvador includes the area where the capital city of El Salvador was located since the sixteenth century. The original buildings of the Spanish colony have been mostly destroyed by natural disasters over the years. The few notable surviving buildings were erected in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Mayor Norman Quijano started several large projects with the goal of restoring grandeur of the buildings in the historic downtown. One such project is to reroute the public transportation routes so they no longer pass through the historic downtown. Another project is to relocate illegal street vendors to a designated public market. Another project is the restoration and remodeling of many historical buildings. [ National Palace ] National Palace The current National Palace building replaced the old National Palace built during the years 1866–1870, which was destroyed by fire on December 19, 1889. The construction, undertaken between 1905 to 1911, was the work of engineer José Emilio Alcaine and under the direction of the foreman Pascasio González Erazo. To finish its construction, legislation was passed that collected on colon for every quintal of coffee exported. The materials used were imported from several European countries including Germany, Italy and Belgium. Its facilities were occupied by government offices until 1974. The building contains four main rooms and 101 secondary rooms. The four main rooms each have a distinctive color. The Red Room (Salon Rojo) is used for the ceremonial presentation of credentials of ambassadors or receptions Salvadoran Foreign Ministry. The Red Room has been used for ceremonial purposes since the administration of General Maximiliano Hernández Martínez. The Yellow Room (Salon Amarillo) is used as an office for the President of the Republic. The Pink Room (Salon Rosado) which housed the Supreme Court and later the Ministry of Defense. And the Blue Room (Salon Azul) which was declared a National Historic Landmark in 1974. The Blue Room&apos;s Ionian, Corinthian and Roman style and architecture are notable, and it was the meeting site for the Legislature of El Salvador since 1906. The room, in commemoration of its past purpose, is now called the Salvadoran parliament. [ Metropolitan Cathedral ] [ San Salvador Cathedral ] The new National Cathedral, facing Plaza Barrios in the city centre The Metropolitan Cathedral of the Holy Savior (Catedral Metropolitana de San Salvador) is the principal church of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of San Salvador and the seat of the Archbishop of San Salvador. The church was twice visited by Pope John Paul II who said that the cathedral was &quot; intimately allied with the joys and hopes of the Salvadoran people. &quot; During his visits in 1983 and 1996, the Pope knelt and prayed before the Tomb of Archbishop Óscar Romero, assassinated in 1980, whose tomb here is a major pilgrim draw. The Cathedral site is the place where the old Temple of Santo Domingo (St. Dominic) once stood. Forty four people died on Palm Sunday, March 31, 1980, during the funeral of Archbishop Romero, as a result of a stampede after some gunmen, allegedly members of security forces (although it has never been corroborated), fired on mourners and on Romero&apos;s funeral cortege. The gunmen were never identified. The square in front of the Cathedral was the site of celebrations after the signing of the Chapultepec Peace Accords that ended the Salvadoran Civil War in 1992. The Cathedral was completed and inaugurated on March 19, 1999 and finished off with a festive tiled facade by the Salvadoran master Fernando Llort. [ National Theater ] [ Teatro Nacional de El Salvador ] Teatro Nacional Teatro Nacional de El Salvador, or National Theater of El Salvador, is the oldest theater in Central America. It was designed by the French architect Daniel Beylard, and construction started on November 3, 1911. The building was inaugurated on March 1, 1917. It is of French Renaissance style with modern touches. It was decorated by the Italian architect Lucio Capellaro, and its Great Hall is considered one of the most beautiful and elegant halls in Central America. The National Theater is located on the southern side of Francisco Morazán Plaza on Calle Delgado. The Theater is in the French Renaissance style with details in other styles such as Rococo, Romantic Style, and Art Nouveau. It has capacity for 650 specters in the Grand Hall. It has balconies on three levels. The Presidential Balcony, located between the third and second Floor, has a direct view of center stage. The theater features an ellipsoidal dome containing a mural by painter Carlos Cañas and a striking crystal chandelier. Other spaces include the Hall, Chamber Hall, and Grand Foyer. It was declared a National Monument in 1979. Today the theater is open to tourists, and – since the Historic Downtown Restoration – it is used for plays, shows, opera, singing, and modern dance performances. The theater is the largest and most luxurious one in Central America. [ Calle Arce ] Calle Arce (Maple street) is a major street in San Salvador. The mayor of San Salvador, Norman Quijano, inaugurated the first phase of the redevelopment of Calle Arce, near the Square of Health. The focus of the redevelopment is the sidewalks between 21st and 19th Avenue North. The project includes the installation of 12 antique lights, originally from Spain and dating from 1900, along with six seats and the planting of 40 trees. At the same time, sidewalks will be renovated with ramps to provide access for people with disabilities and seniors. Calle Arce is monitored by 24 members of the Corps Metropolitan Agents (CAM), who specialize in the care and protection of the new public space. [ Parks and plazas ] [ Plaza Gerardo Barrios ] La Plaza Gerardo Barrios, also known as the Civic Plaza, is located in the heart of the city of San Salvador. The statue that dominates the site, dedicated to President Gerardo Barrios, was unveiled in 1909 and was designed by Francisco Durini. The statue is the work was the brothers Antonio and Carlos Ezeta. The figure, made of bronze, is placed on a pedestal of granite and depicts battle scenes and the shield of El Salvador. The square is the site of many demonstrations and political rallies. It is also the focal point for the celebrations accompanying the feast of San Salvador (August 5 and 6), and the procession dedicated to the Divine Savior of the world (called &quot; the descent &quot; ) terminates in the square. Mass also celebrated in the square, and it is the destination of many parades. [ Plaza Libertad ] Plaza Libertad contains the Monument to the Heroes, a commemoration of the centenary of the First Cry of Independence in 1811. The monument highlights an &quot; angel of freedom &quot; at its pinnacle holding laurel wreath in both hands. Years later, as a consequence of increased commercial activity, it was enhanced by the construction of the portals of the West (1915–1916) and the Dalia (1917). [ Plaza Morazán ] The Government of El Salvador, headed by Rafael Zaldivar, ordered the erection of a marble statue in honor of Francisco Morazán, president of the Federal Republic of Central America, to commemorate the fortieth anniversary of his death on March 15, 1882. The work was created by the artist Francisco Durini in Genoa, Italy. The son of Morazan attended the inauguration as a representative of the Government of Honduras. El Salvador&apos;s government declared March 15 as a day of national civic celebration. [ Casa Dueñas ] This important residential building was built in the 1920s by coffee farmer Miguel Dueñas. The government confiscated the house in 1922 to cover debts of the owner. The house remained unoccupied for years. From 1930 and 1933, Mexico leased the house for use by its diplomatic delegation. From 1935 to 1957, the United States legation rented the house to the residence of its ambassadors. Six U.S. ambassadors resided in the house, with occasional guests such as former Presidents Richard Nixon and Lyndon B. Johnson and Senator Robert Kennedy, and movie stars Clark Gable and Tony Curtis. After 1957 it was the temporary headquarters of an advertising agency. The building remained vacant after 1960, until 1973 when the Department of Vocational Training Ministry of Labour occupied it. In 1986 the structure was declared a Cultural Asset by Executive Agreement of May 8, 1985. The ministry of Labor transferred the property to the authorities of the Ministry of Education, to explore the possibility of a restoration and rehabilitation. In 2001 the restoration work began, under the leadership of Dr. Alfredo Martínez Moreno, former director of Salvadorean Language Academy and the Royal Spanish Academy. [ Zona Rosa ] Zona Rosa is a nightclub neighborhood in District 3. It has many hotels, ranging from five star luxury hotels to small, comfortable guest houses. Zona Rosa also includes many high class restaurants and fast food restaurants. The area includes a small business center, and a 25 story high business tower is under construction. Zona Rosa also has many apartment projects which are changing the landscape and life of the area. It is easy to get to Zona Rosa from any part of the city: it is 45 minutes away from the International Airport, and from Escalon one can take 79 Avenue South. [ Hotels ] [ 5934 sqft m2 ] Hilton Princess – The Hilton Princess San Salvador hotel is conveniently located within the business district of San Salvador, 45 minutes away from the San Salvador International Airport; offering the plushest accommodations and the finest amenities among Hilton Princess. The Hilton Princess San Salvador hotel includes 204 guestrooms and suites and of flexible function space. Sheraton Presidente – The Sheraton has a central location just a few steps from the city&apos;s most exclusive stores, bars and restaurants. [ http://www.hotelsuiteslaspalmas.com.sv/ Inicio Hotelsuiteslaspalmas.com.sv February 24, 2012 ] Suites Las Palmas – Hotel Suites Las Palmas is located in Colonia San Benito, one of the most exclusive and strategic neighborhoods in San Salvador, within the Zona Rosa&apos;s lively environment, adjacent to many restaurants, bars, museums and near to International Center for Fairs and Conventions. The Hotel offers 47 suites. [ Museums ] Two of the most important museums in San Salvador are located in Zona Rosa. They are Museo David J. Guzmán and Museo de Arte de El Salvador (MARTE). David J. Guzman National Museum of Anthropology contains a variety of Mayan and Pipil artifacts that date to Mayan classical period. This museum consists of several co-located facilities. The Museum has its own theater, often used by schools to present lessons on subjects such as the theory of evolution, how dinosaurs disappeared, and the cultural heritage from the Mayan Civilization. Museo de Arte MARTE displays an extensive collection of Salvadoran and international art. [ Convention centers ] The Centro Internacional de Ferias y Convenciones (CIFCO) is a multipurpose convention center in the city of San Salvador. Its facilities are located in the Colonia San Benito-Zona Rosa (District 3), [ 5 mi km ] from the Historic Downtown of San Salvador (District 1), in a residential area with good transportation facilities and easy access to first class hotels. It is regarded as the largest and most modern convention center in Central America. It is affiliated with the Union of International Fairs (UFI) and the Association of International Fairs of America (AFIDA). The CIFCO amphitheater is one of the most important performance venues in San Salvador, hosting many concerts and international artists. It has a capacity of 15,000 persons. It also has a parking for over 800 vehicles. From 2003 until 2010, the CIFCO underwent renovation, adding five pavilions and restructuring of the drainage system. The renovation also included the construction of a three-level underground parking for 3,500 vehicles, and hotels within the center. Goals of CIFCO include: Support the international exchange of technological, commercial and industrial ideas Plan and organize conventions for exhibitors from the realms of commerce, industry and tourism Provide a pleasing environment for guests and visitors Promoting the image of El Salvador both nationally and internationally [ Restaurants and nightlife ] There are many restaurants in the Zona Rosa. Some of the most notable restaurants include 503, Paradise Lobster and Steak Dinner, A Lo Nuestro, La Pampa Argentina, Inka Grill, Sushi-Itto, Dynasty Chinese, Diva, and Tre-Fratelli. Zona Rosa has the most vibrant nightlife of San Salvador, featuring many bars, nightclubs, and pubs. [ Shopping centers ] Metrocentro, on Boulevard Los Heroes, is the largest mall in Central America. It took one year to construct the first part of mall, which opened in 1970, and by 2008 the mall had grown to 1,000 stores. The mall receives about 1,700,000 shoppers every month. The mall is owned by Grupo Roble, a Salvadoran construction company, which has also built Metrocentro malls in other cities in El Salvador, such as Santa Ana, San Miguel and Sonsonate. The company has opened Metrocentro Malls outside El Salvador, in Honduras, Nicaragua, Guatemala, and Panama. Centro Comercial el Paseo, on Paseo General Escalon, is a mall which is also owned by Roble. This mall is relatively small compared to Metrocentro, but the stores are more upscale, including a BMW Dealership, Super Selectos Super Market, and MAX Electronic Stores. Restaurants in this mall include La Panetiere (French), Tre Fratelli (Italian), Coffee Cup, Puerco Rico (Puerto Rican), TGI Friday&apos;s, and Buffalo Wings. Centro Comercial Galerias is an eight story mall (3 levels for parking). The mall was built in two phases: the first phase saw the construction of the 3 parking floors and three shopping floors. The second phase added two more stories for shopping. The mall was built around an old house, which was restored and used for shopping space. This mall includes banking facilities, a fast food court, and many European shops, like Givenchy, Bershka, Pull and Bear, and Zara. [ Cuisine ] The restaurant scene in San Salvador is influenced by many different cultures. Food options include Italian, Korean, Japanese, Thai, French, Chilean, American, Peruvian, Mexican, Spanish, Middle Eastern, German, Chinese, Argentine and others. Local food options include several &quot; Pupuserias &quot; where one can purchase the famous Salvadoran Pupusas. [ Museums ] San Salvador has many museums. The two largest and most popular are Museo Nacional de Antropologia de El Salvador (MUNA) and Museo de Arte de El Salvador. MUNA&apos;s mission is to help Salvadorans reflect on their cultural identity through exhibitions, research, publications and educational programs in the fields of archeology and anthropology. The museum&apos;s exhibits are a testimony to the social processes of the various human groups who have inhabited El Salvador. MARTE&apos;s mission is to contribute to the development of the country&apos;s education and culture through the conservation and dissemination of the artistic heritage, and by strengthening historic knowledge, reaffirming cultural values that shape the Salvadoran identity, and promoting new artistic languages. MARTE, a private, nonprofit organization, opened on May 22, 2003. In the time that it has existed, the museum has become an essential element of the cultural life of Central America, with its representative view of art from the mid-nineteenth century to contemporary times. { Marte, Museo de Arte de El Salvador } { MUNA – Museo Nacional de Antropologia de el Salvador } A different, but equally popular museum, is Tin Marín Museo de los Niños (Tin Marin Children&apos;s Museum), located between Gimnasio Nacional José Adolfo Pineda and Parque Cuscatlán. [ http://www.explore-beautiful-el-salvador.com/cuscatlan.html Cuscatlan Park, one of the biggest urban parks in El Salvador Explore-beautiful-el-salvador.com February 24, 2012 ] Tin Marín seeks to contribute to children becoming integral and creative citizens through significant learning, cultural stimulation and entertaining experimentation. [ February 2012 ] The museum has more than 25 exhibits, including The Airplane, The Grocery Store, and the Planetarium. [ Hotels ] San Salvador is home to over 90 hotels, covering a wide range of sizes and prices. The choices include small hotels, located in quiet neighborhoods, and five star hotels. In the Zona Rosa the Hilton Hotel, a five start hotel built in 1997 by Grupo Agrisal, is 55 meters in height(180  ft) and has 15 stories, plus two parking levels, 204 rooms, and eight suites. Zona Rosa also includes hotels such as Suite Las Palmas, Sheraton Presidente, and other small hotels. Connecting to the Torre Futura World Trade Center, in the Escalon neighborhood that lies on the foothills of Cerro El Picacho and the San Salvador Volcano, lies the Crowne Plaza Hotel. The Real InterContinental hotel connects to the Connecting to the Metrocentro mall. In Antiguo Cuscatlán there are many other hotels, for example the Holiday Inn which is connected by a pedestrian bridge to a small shopping plaza, with many restaurants and cafes and the first Starbucks in the country. Beverly Hills Hotel, a five star suite hotel, is located in northern Antiguo Cuscatlán next to the Avante Business Center. { San Salvador Hotels: Read San Salvador Hotel Reviews and Compare Prices – TripAdvisor } [ Gastronomic festivals ] All over the country, there are gastronomic festivals, where people sell food and enjoy art and music. At San Salvador, one is held at Las Fuentes de Bethoven Park every month. [ Sports ] Cuscatlán Statium Magico Gonzalez Statium Estadio Cuscatlán, with a capacity of over 45,000, is the largest soccer venue not only in Central America, but the Caribbean, as well. In addition to being the largest, Estadio Cuscatlán is considered to be the most modern stadium in the region. It was announced on November 16, 2007 that Estadio Cuscatlán would become the first soccer stadium in Central America and Caribbean to have a large LED screen, where the supporters can view the action. The screen is 40  meters in height and width and was completed in March 2008. Estadio Cuscatlán was built in the early 1980s right before the beginning of the civil war. This building, was supposed to kick-off an era of modernization of San Salvador in the 1980s, but the civil war took 12 years of development from the country. Another major stadium is Estadio Nacional de la Flor Blanca, with a capacity of 32,000. This stadium hosted the Central American and Caribbean Games in 2002, where El Salvador came in 6th place among 37 countries. San Salvador is currently home to two soccer teams in the Primera División (El Salvador) : Alianza F.C. and C.D. Atlético Marte. Alianza F.C. currently plays their home games at Estadio Cuscatlán, while Marte currently plays their home games at Estadio Nacional de la Flor Blanca. Alianza is renowned throughout El Salvador for its loyal supporters and for the atmosphere created during games. Alianza gained fame in Central America for winning the CONCACAF Championship and for beating the Brazilian team, Santos, when that side featured the football legend Pele. Marte was also once a prominent team, winning 8 national championships and the 1991 CONCACAF Cup Winners Cup. [ Major tourist attractions ] Catedral Metropolitana – Metropolitan Cathedral Teatro Nacional de El Salvador – The National Theatre of El Salvador National Palace (El Salvador) – The National Palace Monumento al Divino Salvador del Mundo – Monument to the Savior of the World Casa Presidencial – The Presidential Mansion Monumento a La Libertad – Monument to Liberty Estadio Cuscatlán – Soccer stadium Monumento a la Constitucion – Constitution monument Plaza Alberto Masferrer [ Education ] San Salvador has a large number of private high schools, including Protestant schools (such as Colegio Cristiano Josue, Colegio Bautista de San Salvador located in San Jacinto neighborhood), Catholic high schools (such as Liceo Salvadoreño, Externado San José, Colegio Don Bosco, Colegio La Asunción, Colegio María Auxiliadora), and other secular (such as García Flamenco and Colegio Augusto Walte). San Salvador also has many private bilingual schools, such as: Colegio Cristiano Josue (English), Academia Británica Cuscatleca (British English), Colegio Internacional de San Salvador (English), Escuela Americana (English), Escuela Panamericana (English), Liceo Francés (French) and Escuela Alemana (German). El Salvador employs a school classification system administered by the government teaching service (MINED), which scores both private and public schools. A score of A is among the highest, and a score of C means the school needs improvement. San Salvador is home to many higher education institutions. The only public university in the country is Universidad de El Salvador, which is one of the best universities in Central America. Private universities, like Universidad Centroamericana José Simeón Cañas and Universidad Tecnológica, are also located in the capital city. Other universities that focus on particular professions include Escuela de Comunicacion Monica Herrera, ESEN (Escuela Superior de Economia y Negocios), Escuela Militar (Military School) and many others. [ Transportation ] San Salvador a major transportation hub, served by a comprehensive public transport network. Major routes of the national transportation network run through the city. [ Airport ] The country&apos;s primary airport is El Salvador International Airport (AIES), which handles all international flights for El Salvador. AIES replaced Ilopango as the country&apos;s main airport in 1980. AIES: Until 1980, San Salvador was served by Ilopango International Airport, but on January 31, 1980, Ilopango was replaced by the El Salvador International Airport (IATA: SAL, ICAO: MSLP). Ilopango airport is located within the city limits and could not be expanded due to the lack of land and the surrounding population, so the new airport was built outside the city in the neighboring department of La Paz. AIES lies on flat terrain, and it is not surrounded by populated areas, so it can be expanded in the future. AIES is located in the municipality of San Luis Talpa located at 40  km (25miles) from San Salvador. With 2,076,258 passengers in 2008, it was the third busiest airport by passenger traffic in Central America Ilopango International: Ilopango International Airport, is used for military and charter aviation. It recently underwent renovation, and re-opened in 2009. Ilopango is the host of an annual air show. Tamarindo Regional: There are plans to build a new airport on the Salvadoran coast of El Tamarindo, La Unión. [ Roads ] { Expressway /Freeway in Central America } { RN-21 (Boulevard Diego Holguin), due to the increasing amount of vehicular traffic in the west side of the San Salvador Metropolitan Area, which consist of three cities: } { Santa Tecla, } { Antiguo Cuscatlan, and } { San Salvador, in } { El Salvador. } RN-21 Just Completed RN-5 Los Proceres East/West San Salvador has excellent transportion connectivity, due to its extensive road network and its street maintenance system. Interamerican Development Bank has determined that San Salvador has one of the best road systems in Latin America. [ April 2012 ] The road system of Metropolitan Area of San Salvador handles approximately 400,000 vehicles per day. In the morning rush hour, about 600,000 trips are made. The main highway which passes thru San Salvador is the CA-1 ( Pan-American highway ), which at one point becomes Bulevar Arturo Castellanos. The RN-21 (also known as Bulevar Diego de Holguin) is a major east–west road which connects the cities, of Santa Tecla, Antiguo Cuscatlán and it finally merges in San Salvador with the RN-5 East/West (also known as Bulevar Los Proceres) that later turn into the North/South RN-5 heading towards the International Airport. Another major roadway is the RN-4 (Carretera Este Oeste) which goes from San Salvador through Apopa, and subsequently merges with the CA-1 Panamericana. Roads in the capital are named &quot; street &quot; if they travel east-west, and are called &quot; avenue &quot; if they travel north-south. Road numbering starts is at the downtown intersection of Avenida Espana/Avenida Cuscatlán and Delgado Arce street. Avenues to the west of this intersection have odd-number name,s and to the east of the intersection they have even-number names. Streets have odd-number names if they are to the north of the intersection, and even-number names to the south. One particularly heavily travelled road is 49a Avenida Norte, which connects with the RN-5 highway to the airport. An important historical street is Calle Arce, which was shut down in order to create a pedestrian-only region which is part of the historic downtown of San Salvador. Some streets in the city are very narrow with little room for cars to pass, yet there are also many streets that are wide. Within the city, the speed limits are 90kph on highways, 60  km/h on main roads, and 40  km/h on secondary streets and avenues. [ SITRAMSS ] The San Salvador Metropolitan Area Integrated System of Transportation (SITRAMSS) is a proposed high-volume bus transportation system. The first route of the SITRAMSS will make a round trip from San Martin, through Ilopango, Soyapango, through San Salvador, to Antiguo Cuscatlan, and terminate in Santa Tecla. It is estimated that between 40 and 60 busses capable of carrying 160 passengers per trip will start operating in the second half of 2013. [ http://www.laprensagrafica.com/el-salvador/social/158678-vmt-promete-el-sitramss-hasta-2013.html VMT promete el SITRAMSS hasta 2013 Laprensagrafica.com February 24, 2012 ] The departure interval will be approximately eight to ten minutes. [ http://www.laprensagrafica.com/el-salvador/social/117904-preparan-primera-fase-de-sitramss.html Preparan primera fase de SITRAMSS Laprensagrafica.com February 24, 2012 ] By the time the buses have reached the San Salvador historic downtown they would already transported 20,000 passengers, SITRAMSS us a public-private partnership involving the current passenger transport operators, who must purchase the busses. To pay for the infrastructure development, a loan of $50 million has been provided by the Inter-American Development Bank (BID). The system will work with a prepaid card system which is expected to reduce the time required for passengers to enter the busses. An estimated 200,000 passengers will be transported daily, or about 5,600,000 every month. [ Bus and Taxi ] Approximately 200,000 people use the city&apos;s public bus system daily. Some of the bus transportation system is operated by the city government, but the majority is operated by the private sector. This mixture of ownership has contributed to safety and traffic problems. In 2013, when the SITRAMS commences operation, it will resolve many of these problems. [ http://www.elsalvador.com/mwedh/nota/nota_completa.asp?idCat%3D6375%26amp%3BidArt%3D5903160 elsalvador.com, Los buseros quieren invertir en el Sitramss Elsalvador.com February 24, 2012 ] Bus rides typically cost between $0.20 and $0.25, depending on the route. The city government operates a free bus system for use by handicapped, elderly, and pregnant persons. San Salvador is the only city in Central America with a bus system that is entirely free for those categories of persons. A taxi system operates throughout the entire city. Taxi fares depend on the route. Taxi drivers charge based on the destination location, rather than on a timer. Taxis in San Salvador are yellow, and the fleet is primarily composed of Toyota Corollas. [ Railway ] Railway service was absent during the 1990s, but beginning on October 1, 2007, the National Railways of El Salvador (FENADESAL) resumed service. Tickets cost $0.10. Trains depart from near the East Bus Station and travel to the town of Apopa. There are plans to start operation of another route, connecting the northern side of San Salvador, Cuscatancingo, to Apopa and from Apopa, to the city of Nejapa. There is also a historic railroad consisting of railroad cars from the 1960s which were refurbished and put into operation by the ministry of tourism. Once a month, visitors can board the antique train and experience the way San Salvadorians transported themselves in the 1960s. [ Disasters ] [ Great San Salvador Earthquake ] The Gran Hotel in San Salvador The Dueñas building collapses over its bases The city has suffered from many severe earthquakes, the most disastrous of which occurred in 1854. In 1917, the San Salvador volcano erupted, which resulted in three major earthquakes that damaged the city so extensively that the government was forced to temporarily move the capital to the city of Santa Tecla (known at that time as New San Salvador). The most recent earthquakes, in 2001 (one in January and one in February), resulted in considerable damage, especially in Las Colinas suburb, where a landslide destroyed homes and killed many people. During the 1980s, conflicts in El Salvador erupted into a civil war, and many people fled to the city, since most of the fighting occurred outside of it (San Salvador itself was not directly affected by the war until the final offensive of 1989). Hurricanes, tsunamis, and landslides also pose a threat. On November 2009, Hurricane Ida hit the departments of San Salvador, San Vicente and Cuzcatlan. In San Vicente, the municipalities of Verapaz and Guadalupe were totally destroyed by the rainfall that accompanied the hurricane, and the resultant landslide. Many thousands of people were left homeless. The Army and the Red Cross were able to rescue many people, and the government opened public schools to be used as temporary shelters for three months. The Hurricane destroyed some bridges, and some towns lost communications. The people of El Salvador raised money for the homeless and international aid came from countries such as the United States, Mexico, Nicaragua and Guatemala, and the European Union. [ Tropical Storm Agatha ] See also: Tropical Storm Agatha (2010) Tropical Storm Agatha Tropical storm Agatha hit the Central American coast on Thursday, May 27, 2010. About [ 3 ft m ] of rainfall over a period of five days was recorded in the Metropolitan Area of San Salvador, producing sinkholes, flash floods, and mudslides. Districts particularly hard hit included downtown, El Picacho, and Montebello. [ Security ] Concerns about public safety in San Salvador increased in the late 1980s due to the Civil War. Although the Civil War was primarily fought in the countryside, during the latter years of the war, guerrillas started attacking the capital city. San Salvador recovered quickly from the Civil War, but gang ( &quot; mara &quot; ) violence soon became a problem. The 18th Street gang that originated in Los Angeles, has proliferated in San Salvador. A rival gang is the Mara Salvatrucha. In 2002 the crime rates in San Salvador skyrocketed and the municipal government was unable to combat the rise. Recent efforts by mayor Norman Quijano to restore public safety have been somewhat successful. Security measures in San Salvador’s most troubled Districts (5 and 6, which border Soyapango, and are home to many gangs) included safety campaigns and recreational activities to keep youth from joining gangs. The mayor also initiated a security camera program so the police can watch the most heavily trafficked areas of the city. The security camera project started in the historic downtown and will expand throughout the entire city. [ February 2012 ] Today, San Salvador is considered to be a land of opportunity for many immigrants from neighboring countries, such as Honduras, Nicaragua, and Guatemala. Immigrants also come from South American countries such as Peru and Bolivia, and it also is home to a Korean population and a European minority. As of 2011 San Salvador had managed to reduce its crime rate, reducing its murder rate to a level lower than Haiti, Venezuela, [ http://hdrstats.undp.org/en/countries/profiles/VEN.html International Human Development Indicators – UNDP Hdrstats.undp.org February 24, 2012 ] Mexico, Guatemala, or Honduras. [ http://hdrstats.undp.org/en/countries/profiles/HND.html International Human Development Indicators – UNDP Hdrstats.undp.org February 24, 2012 ] Also according to a UN Development report, San Salvador has a relatively low robbery rate of 90 per 100,000, [ http://hdrstats.undp.org/en/countries/profiles/SLV.html International Human Development Indicators – UNDP Hdrstats.undp.org February 24, 2012 ] compared to San José, the capital of Costa Rica, which has 524 robberies per 100,000. [ http://hdrstats.undp.org/en/countries/profiles/CRI.html International Human Development Indicators – UNDP Hdrstats.undp.org January 29, 2010 February 24, 2012 ] Districts 3 and 4 [ http://www.elsalvador.com/mwedh/default.asp Bienvenidos a elsalvador.com, el portal de noticias de El Salvador, San Salvador Elsalvador.com February 24, 2012 ] are the safest in the country, comparable to that of a European cities; Districts 1 and 2 have a slightly higher crime rate than 3 or 4; and District 5 bordering San Marcos, and District 6 bordering Soyapango the areas that have the highest crime rates. [ Photo gallery of sites in San Salvador ] Avante Santa Elena Apartments in San Salvador El Pedregal Citi-bank Tower Cuscatlan Stadium Urban Apartments Greater San Salvador, seen from the Quetzaltepec volcano. Northwest San Salvador The Metropolitan Cathedral Monumento al Divino Salvador del Mundo (Monument to the Savior of the World) Monument to the Revolution Apartment Complex El Pedregal Side View San Benito Apartment Zone Terra Alta Luxurios La Gran Via Multiplaza Mall Multiplaza Mall San Benito Apartments2 San Benito Apraments Escalon Apartments Escalon Apartments Escalon Apartments Highway entering San Salvador through Santa Tecla. Five star Hilton Hotel in zona rosa. Office buildings near the &apos;Salvador del Mundo. Shell Gas Station &amp; Apartment building National Palace [ Twin towns and sister cities ] [ List_of_twin_towns_and_sister_cities_in_Central_America#El Salvador List of twin towns and sister cities in El Salvador ] San Salvador is twinned with: [ VEN ] { Caracas, Venezuela * } [ COL ] { Cartagena de Indias, Colombia * } [ GUA ] { Guatemala City, Guatemala * } [ Mexico ] { Guadalajara, Mexico * } [ Bolivia ] { La Paz, Bolivia * } [ United States ] { Los Angeles, United States * } [ Nicaragua ] { Managua, Nicaragua } { * } [ Spain ] { Madrid, Spain * } [ Mexico ] { Mexico City, Mexico * } [ Canada ] { Montreal, Canada * } [ Russia ] { Saint Petersburg, Russia * } [ HON ] { San Pedro Sula, Honduras * } [ Brazil ] { São Paulo, Brazil * } [ ROC ] { Taipei, Taiwan * } [ Israel ] { Tel Aviv, Israel } [ See also ] Metropolitan Area of San Salvador San Salvador Department San Salvador (volcano) Antiguo Cuscatlán Santa Tecla Concepción de Ataco Soyapango [ References ] [ 30em ] [ External links ] [ San Salvador ] Municipality of the city of San Salvador The Tramways of San Salvador, 1876–1929 Category:Populated places in El Salvador Category:Municipalities of the San Salvador Department Category:Populated places established in 1525 Category:Capitals in North America af:San Salvador am:ሳን ሳልቫዶር ar:سان سلفادور zh-min-nan:San Salvador be:Горад Сан-Сальвадор be-x-old:Сан-Сальвадор (горад) bg:Сан Салвадор bo:སན་སལ་ཝ་ཌོར། br:San Salvador (kêr) ca:San Salvador cs:San Salvador cy:San Salvador da:San Salvador de:San Salvador et:San Salvador el:Σαν Σαλβαδόρ es:San Salvador eo:San-Salvadoro eu:San Salvador fa:سان سالوادور hif:San Salvador fr:San Salvador (Salvador) fy:San Salvador gd:San Salvador gl:San Salvador, El Salvador ko:산살바도르 hy:Սան Սալվադոր hr:San Salvador io:San Salvador id:San Salvador ia:San Salvador os:Сан-Сальвадор it:San Salvador (El Salvador) he:סן סלוודור jv:San Salvador ka:სან-სალვადორი sw:San Salvador ht:San Salvadò la:Sancti Salvatoris Urbs lv:Sansalvadora lt:San Salvadoras ln:San Salvador lmo:San Salvador (El Salvador) hu:San Salvador mk:Сан Салвадор mr:सान साल्व्हाडोर nah:San Salvador nl:San Salvador (stad) ja:サンサルバドル no:San Salvador nn:San Salvador nov:San Salvador oc:San Salvador pms:San Salvador pl:San Salvador pt:San Salvador ro:San Salvador qu:San Salvador ru:Сан-Сальвадор sah:Сан Салвадор sco:San Salvador sq:San Salvadori simple:San Salvador sk:San Salvador (Salvádor) sr:Сан Салвадор fi:San Salvador sv:San Salvador tl:San Salvador ta:சான் சல்வடோர் th:ซันซัลวาดอร์ tr:San Salvador uk:Сан-Сальвадор ug:سان سالۋادور vi:San Salvador vo:San Salvador war:San Salvador yo:San Salvador zh:聖薩爾瓦多