[ Red Planet The cover illustration by Clifford Geary for the original 1949 edition First edition cover Robert A. Heinlein Clifford Geary United States English Heinlein juveniles Science fiction novel Scribner&apos;s 1949 Print ( Hardcover and Paperback ) NA Space Cadet Farmer in the Sky ] Red Planet is a 1949 science fiction novel by Robert A. Heinlein about students at boarding school on the planet Mars. It represents the first appearance of Heinlein&apos;s idealized Martian elder race (see also Stranger in a Strange Land ). The version published in 1949 featured a number of changes forced on Heinlein by Scribner&apos;s, since it was published as part of the Heinlein juveniles. After Heinlein&apos;s death, the book was reissued by Del Rey Books as the author originally intended. [ Plot summary ] On Mars, Jim Marlowe and Frank Sutton travel to the Lowell Academy boarding school for the start of the academic year. Jim takes along his native, volleyball -sized pet, Willis the Bouncer, who is about as intelligent as a human child and has a photographic memory for sounds, which he can also reproduce perfectly. At a rest stop, Willis wanders off and encounters one of the adult sentient Martian s. The three-legged alien takes the two boys and Willis to join a ritual called &quot; growing together &quot; with a group of its fellows. They also share water, making Jim and Frank &quot; water friends &quot; with the Martian, who is named Gekko. At school, Jim gets into trouble with the authoritarian headmaster, Mr. Howe, who confiscates Willis, claiming that it is against the new rules to have pets. When Jim and Frank sneak into Howe&apos;s office and rescue Willis, the bouncer repeats two overheard conversations between Howe and Beecher, the unscrupulous colonial administrator of Mars, detailing Beecher&apos;s plans for Willis and the colony. When Beecher learns Howe has a bouncer, he is ecstatic, since the London Zoo is willing to pay a hefty price for a specimen. Worse, Beecher is secretly planning to prevent the annual migration of the colonists (necessary to avoid 12 months of life threatening winter weather) in order to save money. The boys run away from school to warn their parents and the colony. The boys set out to skate the thousands of miles to their homes on the frozen Martian canals. During the trip, Frank gets sick. On the third night, they are forced to take shelter inside a giant Martian cabbage plant (nearly suffocating when it folds up at night). The next day, they meet some native Martians, who accept Jim because of his relationship to Willis and water-friendship with Gekko. The Martians treat Frank&apos;s illness and send the two boys home by a swift &quot; subway &quot;. Once warned, Jim&apos;s father quickly organizes the migration, hoping to catch Beecher off guard. The colonists take over the boarding school, and they turn it into a temporary shelter. Howe locks himself in his office, while Beecher sets up automatic, photosensor-controlled weapons outside to stop the malcontents (as he calls them) from leaving. After two colonists are killed trying to surrender, and the power to the building is cut, the colonists decide they have no choice but to fight back. Jim and Frank show Jim&apos;s father how they can escape through the school&apos;s unguarded garbage hatch. The colonists organize a raiding party, with the boys taking part, capture Beecher&apos;s office and proclaim the colony&apos;s independence from the Earth. Several Martians enter the school area, and one of them shows up in the door leading to Howe&apos;s office, hiding him from sight. When the Martian turns away, Howe is nowhere to be found. The Martians then go to Beecher&apos;s building, and when they leave, he has also vanished. The Martians had been content to allow humans to share their planet, but Beecher&apos;s threat to Willis has made them reconsider. They present the colonists with an ultimatum: leave the planet or else. Dr. MacRae negotiates with the Martians, and is able to persuade them to let the colonists stay, mainly because of Jim&apos;s strong friendship with Willis. Doctor MacRae theorizes that Martians start life as bouncers, metamorphose into adults, then continue to exist after their deaths as the &quot; old ones. &quot; In the end, Jim resigns himself to giving Willis up so he can undergo the transformation to adulthood. As with Podkayne of Mars, there are two versions of the ending. As originally written (and published much later) it is made clear that Willis will not emerge as an adult for fifty years. This was edited and changed by Heinlein&apos;s publishers, as was a discussion early in the novel in which MacRae expresses strong support for adults and older children being free to carry handguns, and opposition to any government which would restrict that. [ Critical reception ] Surveying Heinlein&apos;s juvenile novels, Jack Williamson characterized Red Planet as Heinlein&apos;s first genuinely successful effort in the sequence, saying that &quot; Heinlein [has] found his true direction... The Martian setting is logically constructed and rich in convincing detail [while] the characters are engaging and the action develops naturally. &quot; { Jack Williamson, &quot; Youth Against Space, &quot; Algol 17, 1977, p.11. } P. Schuyler Miller, reviewing the original edition, praised the novel&apos;s &quot; verisimilitude, the attention to detail which Heinlein&apos;s adult readers know well.... the explanations are never dragged in for their own sake, and the plot grows naturally out of the setting. &quot; { &quot; Book Reviews &quot;, } { Astounding Science Fiction, August 1950, p.147 } [ Connections with Stranger in a Strange Land ] The life cycle of Martians (as theorized by Doctor MacRae) is the same in Stranger in a Strange Land. It is noted in this novel that the &quot; old ones &quot; inhabit two planes of existence: the physical and the (unspecified) other. Further, the water friends theme is recapitulated in Stranger in a Strange Land as &quot; water brothers. &quot; Furthermore, the Martian ability to make an item or person disappear, which was a major plot point in Stranger, is demonstrated here. The general description of Martian society as characterized by reverence for freedom is similar. For instance, the Martian Gekko &quot; radiates displeasure &quot; upon understanding what is meant by &quot; london-zoo, &quot; and further discovering that Howe meant to sell Willis to a zoo—a reaction not dissimilar to that of Mike, who oftens senses a &quot; wrongness &quot; in cages, and whose first impulse when encountering the caged animals of a zoo is to attempt to set them free. [ Adaptations ] In 1994, the novel was adapted by Gunther-Wahl Productions into an animated miniseries for Fox Kids. [ Influences ] The background of Mars presented in the novel, as a desert planet crisscrossed by giant canals built by an ancient civilization to bring water from the polar ice caps, is a common scenario in science fiction novels of the early 20th century, and was actually put forward as a plausible theory by some astronomers around the turn of the century, notably Percival Lowell mentioned in the novel. It stems from early telescope observations of Mars by 19th century astronomers who, beginning with Italian Giovanni Schiaparelli in 1877, believed they saw straight lines on the planet. Schiaparelli called them canali (grooves), which was popularly mistranslated into English as &quot; canals &quot;. [ References ] [ External links ] [ 1328 Red Planet ] Category:1949 novels Category:Mars in fiction Category:Novels by Robert A. Heinlein Category:Prometheus Award winning works Category:1940s science fiction novels Category:American science fiction novels Category:Children&apos;s science fiction novels fr:La Planète rouge (roman)