[ March 2009 May 2009 ] Australian cuisine refers to the cuisine of the Commonwealth of Australia and its preceding indigenous and colonial societies. Indigenous Australians have occupied the lands of Australia for some 40,000–60,000 years, during which time they developed a unique hunter gatherer diet, known as &quot; bush tucker &quot;, drawn from regional Australian flora and fauna —such as the kangaroo. Seafood is a prominent staple food due to Australia&apos;s long coastline. Australia was, from 1788 to 1900, a collection of British colonies in which culinary tastes were strongly influenced by British and Irish traditions - and agricultural products such as beef cattle, sheep and wheat became staples in the national diet. Post-war Australia&apos;s multicultural immigration program lead to a diversification of the cuisine of Australia, particularly under the influence of Mediterranean and East Asia n migrants. [ http://www.cultureandrecreation.gov.au/articles/foodanddrink/index.htm Australian food and drink - australia.gov.au Cultureandrecreation.gov.au 2008-09-23 2011-09-17 ] Australian cuisine of the first decade of the 21st century shows the influence of globalisation. Organic and biodynamic, kosher and halal foods have become widely available and there has been a revival of interest in bushfood s. British traditions persist to varying degrees in domestic cooking and the takeaway food sector, with roast dinner s, the Australian meat pie and fish and chips remaining popular, but there are also new elements featured in these foods. To barbecue meats in the open air is considered a treasured national tradition. While fast food chains are abundant, Australia&apos;s metropolitan centres possess many famed haute cuisine and nouvelle cuisine establishments. Restaurant s whose product includes contemporary adaptations, interpretations or fusions of exotic influences are frequently termed &quot; Modern Australian &quot;. [ http://www.sbs.com.au/food/cuisineindex/RecipeByCuisineMain/383 Modern Australian recipes and Modern Australian food : SBS Food Sbs.com.au 2011-09-17 ] [ Indigenous Australian bush tucker ] [ Bushfood ] { Bush Tucker &apos;&apos; (bush foods) harvested at Alice Springs Desert Park. } Before the arrival of the First Fleet of Europeans at Sydney in 1788, indigenous Australians survived off the often unique native flora and fauna of the Australian bush, for between 40,000 and 60,000 years. Hunting of kangaroo, wallaby and emu was common. Other foods widely consumed included bogong moth s, witchetty grub s, lizard s and snake s. Bush berries, fruits, and honeys were also used. Resource availability and dietary makeup varied from region to region - desert dwellers could be constantly on the move to find new foods, while other tribal districts allowed relatively fixed positioning. Fish were caught using technologies such as spears, hooks and traps. Food preparation techniques also varied, however a common cooking technique was for the carcass to be thrown directly on a camp fire to be roasted. [ Development of modern Australian cuisine ] { Chinatown, Sydney. } { Multicultural } { immigration to Australia has contributed to the development of a diverse cuisine. } Following the pre-colonial period, European settlers began arriving with the First Fleet of British ships at Sydney harbour in 1788. The British settlers found some familiar game in Australia - such as swan, goose, pigeon and fish - but the new settlers often had difficulty adjusting to the prospect of native fauna as a staple diet. They set about establishing agricultural industries producing more familiar Western style produce. After initial difficulties, Australian agriculture became a major global producer and supplied an abundance of fresh produce for the local market. Stock grazing (mostly sheep and cattle) are prevalent throughout the continent. Queensland and New South Wales became Australia&apos;s main beef cattle producers, while dairy cattle farming is found in the southern states, predominantly in Victoria. Wheat and other grain crops are spread fairly evenly throughout the mainland states. Sugar cane is also a major crop in Queensland and New South Wales. Fruit and vegetables are grown throughout Australia. [ http://www.cultureandrecreation.gov.au/articles/farms/ Australian farms and farming communities - australia.gov.au Cultureandrecreation.gov.au 2011-05-10 2011-09-17 ] { Western stock and crops and } { Australian agriculture now produces an abundance of fresh produce. } Other than the indigenous climate and produce, Australian cuisine has been derived from the tastes of immigrant settlers to Australia and the produce they have introduced to the continent. The British colonial period established a strong base of interest in Anglo - Celtic style recipes and methods. Subsequent waves of multicultural immigration, with a majority drawn from Asia and the Mediterranean region, and the strong, sophisticated food cultures these ethnic communities have brought with them influenced the development of Australian cuisine. Besides the culinary heritage of the Anglo-Celtic majority, the cuisines of China, Germany, Greece, Italy, Lebanon, Malaysia, Thailand, Vietnam are not only popular, but have also left the greatest impact on Modern Australian cuisine. In recent times there are also substantial influences and culinary trends from American cuisine, French cuisine, Indian cuisine, Japanese cuisine, Moroccan cuisine and Spanish cuisine. Fresh produce is readily available and thus used extensively, and the trend (urged by long-term government health initiatives) is towards low-salt, low-fat healthy cookery incorporating lean meat and lightly cooked, colourful, steamed or stir-fried vegetables. With most of the Australian population residing in coastal areas, fish and seafood is popular. In the temperate regions of Australia vegetables are traditionally eaten seasonally, especially in regional areas, although in urban areas there is large scale importation of fresh produce sourced from around the world by supermarkets and wholesalers for grocery stores, to meet demands for year-round availability. During Spring: Artichoke, Asparagus, Beanshoots, Beetroot, Broccoli, Cabbage, Cauliflower, Cucumber, Leek, Lettuce, Mushrooms, Peas, Rhubarb, and Spinach. During Summer: Capsicum, Cucumber, Eggplant, Squash, Tomato, Zucchini. Australia&apos;s climate makes barbecue s commonplace. Barbecue stalls selling sausage s and fried onion on white bread with tomato or barbecue sauce are common in fund raising for schools or community groups. These stalls are called &quot; Sausage Sizzles &quot;. [ Beverages ] { billycan on a campfire, used to heat water. } Billy tea is the drink prepared by the ill-fated Swagman in the popular Australian folksong Waltzing Matilda. Boiling water for tea over a camp fire and adding a gum leaf for flavouring remains an iconic traditional Australian method for preparing tea, which was a staple drink of the Australian colonial period. { Penfolds Grange, 1999, an Australian } { wine, made predominantly from the } { Shiraz (Syrah) } { grape and usually a small percentage of } { Cabernet Sauvignon. } The Australian Wine Industry is the fourth largest exporter of wine around the world, with 760 million litres a year to a large international export market and contributes $5.5 billion per annum to the nation&apos;s economy. There is also a significant domestic market for Australian wines, with Australians consuming nearly 500 million litres of wine per year in the early 21st Century. Wine is produced in every state, with more than 60 designated wine regions totaling approximately 160,000 hectares. Australia’s wine regions are mainly in the southern, cooler parts of the country, in South Australia, New South Wales, Victoria, and Western Australia. Amongst the most famous wine districts are the Hunter Valley and Barossa Valley and among the best known wine producers are Penfolds, Rosemount Estate, Wynns Coonawarra Estate and Lindeman&apos;s. [ http://www.cultureandrecreation.gov.au/articles/wine/ Australia&apos;s wine industry - australia.gov.au Cultureandrecreation.gov.au 2007-12-14 2011-09-17 ] Beer in Australia has been popular since colonial times. James Squire is considered to have founded Australia&apos;s first commercial brewery in 1798 and the Cascade Brewery in Hobart, Tasmania, has been operating since the early 19th century. Since the 1970s, Australian beers have become increasingly popular globally - with Fosters lager being an iconic export brand. However, Fosters is not the biggest seller on the local market, with alternatives including Victoria Bitter outselling the popular export. Craft beers are also becoming popular, from breweries such as Coopers and Little Creatures. [ http://www.abc.net.au/pm/content/2011/s3300391.htm Changing beer habits to blame for profit decline ABC News 2011-09-23 2011-12-09 ] Australia has a distinct coffee culture and is often cited as being one of the most developed and vibrant in the world. [ http://www.baristabasics.com.au/article.asp?AID%3D49 Coffee Academy, Australia, Brisbane, Melbourne, Coffee Art Barista Basics 2006-03-28 2011-09-17 ] The development of the coffee industry has grown not from coffee chains but through independent cafés born out of early Greek and Italian immigration since the early 20th century. The iconic Greek cafés of Sydney and Melbourne were the first to introduce locally roasted coffees in 1910. In 1952, the first espresso machines began to appear in Australia and a plethora of fine Italian coffee houses were emerging in Melbourne and Sydney.Pelligrini’s Espresso Bar and Legend Café often lay claim to being Melbourne’s first ‘real’espresso bars opening their doors in 1954 and 1956 respectively. This decade also saw the establishment of one of Australia&apos;s most iconic coffee brands, Vittoria which remains the country&apos;s largest coffee maker and distributor. { latte art. } The Australian-invented flat white, which was developed sometime in the latter half of the 20th century. It has become extremely popular across the country and is one of the most popular espresso beverages. The flat white&apos;s popularity has also spread to New Zealand and is beginning to take hold in the United Kingdom. The flat white is a Cafe Latte with no foam. In the 1980s, Italy’s Lavazza coffee began its export business in Australia, a whole decadebefore expanding into the UK and US markets. Since this time espresso based coffees have remained the most popular form of coffee amongst Australians [ http://www.ausfoodnews.com.au/2010/03/04/aussie-cafe-culture-accounts-for-biggest-growth-in-coffee.html Aussie café culture accounts for ‘biggest growth in coffee’ &amp; #124; Australian Food News Ausfoodnews.com.au 2010-03-04 2011-09-17 ] Although Australians often drink tea at home, it has been found that in out-of-home establishments where tea and coffee are sold together, tea accounted for only 2.5% of total sales. To this day, coffee chains such as Starbucks have very little market share in Australia. One reason for this is that unlike in the United States and Asia, Australia already had a developed coffee culture for many decades before their introduction to the market. [ James Braund http://www.lonelyplanet.com/australia/travel-tips-and-articles/69143 Caffeination: Australia’s (obsessive) coffee culture - travel tips and articles Lonely Planet 2011-09-17 ] [ Fish and seafood ] { Balmain Bug, also known as a butterfly fan lobster. } [ Seafood in Australia ] Australia&apos;s 11 million square kilometre fishing zone is the third largest in the world and allows for bountiful access to seafood which significantly influences Australian cuisine. Clean ocean environments around Australia produce high quality seafoods for domestic consumption and export. lobster, prawn, tuna, salmon and abalone are the main ocean species harvested commercially, while aquaculture produces more than 60 species for consumption including edible oyster s, salmonoids, southern bluefin tuna, mussel, prawn, barramundi, yellowtail kingfish, and freshwater finifish. [ http://dfat.gov.au/facts/seafoodindustry.html About Australia: The Australian seafood industry Dfat.gov.au 2011-09-17 ] While inland river and lake systems are relatively sparse, they nevertheless provide some unique fresh water game fish and crustacea suitable for dining. Fishing and aquaculture constitute Australia&apos;s fifth most valuable agricultural industry after wool, beef, wheat and dairy. [ http://www.daff.gov.au/fisheries Fisheries Home DAFF 2011-09-13 2011-09-17 ] Approximately 600 varieties of marine and freshwater seafood species are caught and sold in Australia for both local and overseas consumption. { Tetsuya&apos;s signature dish, Confit of Tasmanian Ocean Trout } Australian cuisine features Australian seafood such as: Southern bluefin tuna, King George whiting, Moreton Bay bug, Mud Crab, Jew Fish, Dhufish (Western Australia) and Yabby. Australia is one of the largest producers of abalone and rock lobster. Fish and chips is a popular take-away food that originated in the United Kingdom and which remains popular in Australia. { &quot; Food History Timeline &quot;, BBC/Open University. } It generally consists of deep-fried fish (often flake rather than cod in Australia) batter with deep-fried chipped (slab-cut) potato es. Flathead fish is also popular sport and table fish found in all parts of Australia. Barramundi is an iconic sporting fish found in Northern Australian river systems. Highly prized by anglers for their good fighting ability, it is a common eating dish in seafood restaurants. Most Australians live close to the coast and have ready access to high quality seafood restaurants and local fish and chip shops. Sydney in particular is noted for its harbourside seafood restaurants, including the Doyles chain in Sydney, notably Doyles on the Beach at Watson&apos;s Bay; and Tetsuya&apos;s Restaurant owned by chef Tetsuya Wakuda which bases its menu on Australian, Japanese and classic French cuisine, and makes use of Australian ingredients including Tasmanian Ocean Trout. [ Fruit ] { Granny Smith apple } [ October 2010 ] There are many species of Australian native fruits, such as Quandong (native peach), Wattleseed, Muntries / Munthari berry, Illawarra plums, Riberry, Native Raspberries and Lilli pillies. { http://www.cse.csiro.au/research/nativefoods/nativefoods_website.pdf } These usually fall under the category of &quot; bush tucker &quot;, (bush foods), which are used more commonly in restaurants and used in commercial preserves and pickles but are not generally well known to Australians due to low availability. Australia also has large fruit growing regions in most states for tropical fruits in the north, stone fruits and temperate fruits in the south which has a mediterranean or temperate climate. The Granny Smith variety of apple s first originated in Sydney, Australia in 1868. [ http://www.ryde.nsw.gov.au/ryde/msherwood.htm http://web.archive.org/web/20070811001112/http%3A//www.ryde.nsw.gov.au/ryde/msherwood.htm 2007-08-11 Granny Smith and her Apples 2007-08-11 ] Another well known Australian apple variety is the Cripps Pink, known locally and internationally as &quot; Pink Lady &quot; apples, which was first cultivated in 1973. Fruit is widely used in Australian cuisine however is consumed mostly in its fresh, rather than cooked form with the successful &quot; 2 fruit and 5 veg &quot; campaign for healthy portions per day. [ http://www.gofor2and5.com.au Go for 2 &amp; 5 ] In terms of cooked fruit dishes, fruits are often eaten poached in sugar syrup (often with spices such as vanilla, cloves or citrus peel) and eaten as a breakfast or dessert, which is more common amongst older Australians, or baked in dishes such as apple crumble, pies, pastries and cakes. Fresh fruit is often consumed simply without any adulteration at any time of day, or combined in fruit salad, which is a popular summer dessert nationally. Popular and commonly available fruits produced in Australia are typically: apples, banana, kiwi fruit, oranges and other citrus, mangoes (seasonally), pears, nectarines, plums, apricots, grapes, melons, pawpaw, papaya, pineapple, passionfruit and berry fruits (such as strawberries, raspberries etc.). Other fruits tend not to be widely cultivated due to the plant requiring climate or soil conditions that are not cost effective or the plant species is not well known to the general market. As these fruits tend to be available in most supermarkets across the nation (seasonally) with large chain supermarkets often providing free recipe cards and recipes online, there are few areas with a distinctly local manner of preparing, cooking &amp; serving fruit dishes that are not found in other Australian states. [ Regional cuisine ] { Kangaroo meat at a supermarket } Regional Australian cuisines commonly use locally grown vegetables. [ June 2011 ] In the Southern states of Victoria and South Australia, in particular the Barossa Valley, wines and food reflects the region&apos;s traditions and heritage. { &quot; South Australian Food and Wine Tourism Strategy 2009 – 2014. &quot; South Australian Tourism Industry Council. Accessed July 2011. } Barossa&apos;s early settlers brought their food traditions with them, instilling the region&apos;s cuisine with a strong German influence. Preserving, smoking and baking are techniques used in this regional cuisine. The area is famous for its vineyards and the abundance of fresh produce including fruit, nuts, vegetables and citrus. Dishes are made with poultry, livestock, yabbies and hare, some examples are: smoked Mettwurst, Lachsschinken and Bratwurst sausages. Traditional breads and yeasted cakes like Bienenstich and Streuselkuchen, pickled onions and gherkins, olives and olive oil, egg noodles, and a variety of chutneys, pickles and preserves, as well as dried fruits, Barossa cheese and quince paste - are all featured in the cuisine. [ http://www.southaustralia.com/BarossaFood.aspx Barossa Food - South Australia - South Australia. A brilliant blend South Australia 2011-09-17 ] The climate does also create smaller regional variations. Areas in southern Australia which has a mediterranean or temperate climate allows cooking for richer hot dishes, or slow cooked dishes in the winter which is not always desirable in the warmer regions further north at the same time of year, as well as experiencing greater seasonal change in local produce. In the north of the country, which often has just two seasons for the tropics and subtropical regions as hot and wet, or cool and dry, this region produces year round fruits and vegetables as well as tropical produce which is not possible further south. Regional cuisine often is also reflected in more recent migration patterns, with European influences (such as Italian, Greek, French, German, Polish etc.) as well as Asian, African &amp; South American cuisines tend to be found in the regions where the climate is similar to their homelands. Northern regions and island communities for tropical or desert climates use cooking methods that reflect their environment with a higher proportion of cooking outdoors and using barbecue s more frequently than the southern regions that may have cold and wet winters. As the majority of the populous live in capital cities relatively close to the sea, the cuisine of these regions has been influenced by involving quality fresh seafood. Filleted &quot; ready to cook and eat &quot; preparations are more popular as opposed to whole fish or any seafood product which contains bones. Fish that is served containing bones is undesirable almost to being a modern taboo in Australia, although whole fish preparations can found in specialist metropolitan restaurants. The catchphrase many outside of Australia associate with the country itself &quot; put another shrimp on the barbie &quot; is in cooking terms (opposed to the welcoming hospitality context), largely a misnomer in metropolitan regions. Australians cook land meat products (beef, lamb, chicken, pork etc.) on the barbecue far more than seafood, as the cooking method can be too dry and harsh for the delicate flesh and a little too complex to do well for the average home. Seafood is most commonly cooked either pan fried as well as stir-fried, deep-fried or cooked on a flat hot plate (a plate similar to that which teppanyaki chefs use) or frequently in pasta dishes. Metropolitan areas with older generations are more often to bake, poach or steam their seafood simply, or eat it fried. International forms of cooking seafood - especially South East Asian, Japanese, Korean and Middle Eastern or Mediterranean cuisines are increasingly popular. Inland areas with good river or wetland systems also tend to use much of the local freshwater fish &amp; crustaceans as part of their diets, which can be prepared either using a local ingredient with mainstream methods, or cooked whole in traditional Aboriginal styles wrapped using leaves such as native ginger (where available) or in bark such as from the paperbark tree, which is common in wetland or marshy areas and river systems. As the climate and environment is not favourable for keeping fresh fish, it is typically cooked soon after catching with minimal preparation as delays can increase food poisoning risks. Dry area communities further inland in modern times have access to frozen seafood as well as other fresh food products as food has been shipped in refrigerated trucks from the cities and can be stored where infrastructure exists to do so. This has consequently influenced local regional cuisines by increasing the scope of products they can use as they are no longer dependent on what can be sourced or grown in the local climate. In various states there are regions well known for being food production and fine dining centres. South Australia is famed for the above mentioned Barossa Valley; in Western Australia the Swan Valley, Margaret River and Manjimup regions, as well as Broome in the north; Victoria is famed for the Murray River regions and the Mornington Peninsula. In Southern regions, these are often traditionally wine producing areas that expanded into meat based smallgoods, cheese and dairy, artisan foodstuffs (such as breads, confections and preserves) and restaurants. [ Breakfast ] { Vegemite on toast } The breakfast frequently resembles breakfast in many Western countries, but may include ethnic influences. In warmer areas, breakfast is generally light. In colder seasons, porridge or a full English breakfast may be consumed. The light breakfast commonly consists of breakfast cereal, toast, and fruit. Beverages taken at breakfast include tea, coffee, flavoured milk, or juice. A popular breakfast food in Australia is Vegemite, a spread similar to Marmite. [ Dinner ] The evening meal is the main meal of the day for most Australians. It is usually consumed at home with members of the immediate family or household. Common choices would be roast meat and vegetables, pasta, pizza, casseroles, barbecued meat, fish and seafood, vegetables, salad, soup, curries and stir-frys. A standard cafe or restaurant in Australia not adhering to any particular ethnic cuisine might offer sandwiches and focaccia s, a range of pasta, risotto, pizza, salad, curry dishes, steak, chicken or other meat-based dishes, schnitzels, fish, cakes or other desserts, red and white wine, soft drink, beer, and coffee. [ Iconic Australian foods ] An iconic Australian foodstuff is Vegemite (owned by the American Kraft Foods [ http://www.vegemite.com.au/vegemite/page?PagecRef%3D1 Home Vegemite 2011-09-17 ] ). Other unique or iconic national foods include macadamia nut s; Violet Crumble, a honeycomb chocolate bar; Cherry Ripe; Jaffas, chocolate with an orange -flavoured confectionery shell; the Chiko Roll, a deep-fried savoury roll similar to a spring roll; and the dim sim, a Chinese-inspired dumpling. Other popular Australian foods include Tim Tam s, a chocolate biscuit; musk stick s; fairy bread; lamington s; the Boston bun; the vanilla slice; and the commercial breakfast cereal Weet-Bix. The Australian hamburger is, at its simplest, a fried beef patty, served with shredded lettuce and sliced tomato in a (usually toasted) bread roll. Tomato sauce (the universal Australian term for ketchup) or barbecue sauce (similar, but darker in colour and smokier in flavour) are almost always included, and beetroot (sliced pickled beets) and fried onions are also extremely common additions. Other frequently-served hamburger options are bacon, a fried egg, pineapple slices and cheese. US-style pickles are rarely included, except in burgers from the usual American chains. [ http://burgershereandthere.com/2011/03/02/australian-burger-recipe/ Australian burger recipe burgers here and there 2011-03-02 2011-09-17 ] ANZAC biscuit s and the pavlova are considered by some to be Australian national foods, [ http://www.aussie-info.com/identity/food/pavlova.php www.aussie-info.com Pavlova page Aussie-info.com 2011-09-17 ] { www.aussieslang.com &quot; Anzac biscuits &quot; } although while the oldest known named recipe for pavlova is from New Zealand, its often said in the Australian history that the dessert took its name from Anna Pavlova at the Esplanade Hotel in Perth during a tour of the state where she danced &quot; as light as air &quot; in reference to the light meringue. { &apos;&apos;Pavlova palaver&apos;&apos;, by Susette Goldsmith, New Zealand Listener (reviewing The Pavlova Story: A Slice of New Zealand’s Culinary History, By Helen Leach) } It has been suggested that the current pavlova is an improvement on the older recipe for a meringue cake found in a New Zealand magazine, [ http://au.news.yahoo.com/thewest/a/-/breaking/8448848/hands-off-our-pavlova-kiwis-warned/ Hands off our pavlova, Kiwis warned - The West Australian Au.news.yahoo.com 2010-12-03 2011-09-17 ] however this may all ultimately be coincidental as the 19th century dish Eton mess is a similar dessert of meringue, cream and fruit, although served in a different style. In the pattern of foods named after famous singers and dancers, Dame Nellie Melba also has several dishes named after her, well known is Melba toasts and the Peach Melba, but also less well known is the Chicken Melba, recipes of which can be found in Larousse Gastronomique. The meat pie (minced beef or mutton in a dark spiced gravy, enclosed in a baked pastry shell about 10  cm across) is a well-known take away item as are sausage rolls. While well known to Australian expats, the meat pie is becoming popular in the USA, with food chain Pie Face opening its first chain in New York in 2011. [ http://piefacenyc.com/ Pie face in New York City ] Kangaroo meat is widely available in Australia although it is not among the most commonly eaten meats. In old fashioned colonial recipes, it was treated much like ox tail and braised until tender forming a rich gravy. It is available today in various cuts and sausages. [ http://www.kangaroo-industry.asn.au/products/cuts.htm KIAA - Kangaroo Meat Cuts Kangaroo-industry.asn.au 2011-09-17 ] Also eaten (in specialist restaurants) is camel meat, emu meat, crocodile meat and occasionally (although rarely) wombat. As these need specialist preparation they are not found in mainstream restaurants or at home, however products are now available in supermarkets made of kangaroo, emu or camel meat. Australians are also well known for highly developed tastes for coffee, as Italian and Greek immigrants bought coffee to Australia early in the 20th century and has contributed to the status fine coffee has today. Vittoria brand for example has been known in Australia since 1958, well before it moved to the USA. [ http://www.vittoriacoffee.com/ Vittoria Coffee ] and likewise explains why large international coffee chains are not as successful as locally formed coffee houses (such as local brands Miss Maud, Dome Coffee &amp; Coffee Club) as they do not cater for Australian tastes. Australians also have increasingly developed tastes for quality bread, with local stores such as Bakers Delight (operating in parts of Canada as COBS bakery since 2003) &amp; Brumby&apos;s Bakeries found across the country offering traditional European bread products and supermarkets reflecting the pattern. The broader public is now increasingly familiar with various bread types (such as sour doughs, rye breads, spelt etc.) and specialist traditional bakeries such as New Norcia in Western Australia, German bakeries in South Australia and other styles across the continent. Damper is a traditional Australian soda bread prepared by swagmen, drovers and other travellers. It is a wheat flour based bread, traditionally baked in the coals of a campfire. Australia is one of the worlds major quality wine and beer producing nations. Australia has also in the past been known for producing high volumes of light lager style beers, mostly for domestic and export consumption, but since the 1990s has been producing many boutique and artisan quality beers that the general standard of public tastes have been improved as has local knowledge of boutique beers. The nation also has a longstanding dairy industry (virtually from colonisation) and today produces a wide variety of cheese s, yoghurts, milk, cream and butter products. Australians are high consumers of dairy products, consuming (on average) some 102.4L of milk per person a year, which in part is due to its quality-coffee culture, 12.9  kg of cheese, 3.8  kg of butter (a small reduction from previous year, largely for dietary purposes) and a small increase to 7.1  kg of yoghurt products. [ http://www.dairyaustralia.com.au/Statistics-and-markets/Production-and-sales/Consumption-Summary.aspx Dairy Australia - Consumption statistics ] Dairy products feature frequently in the national cuisine and iconic dishes. [ 210 center Australian foods ANZAC biscuits.JPG ANZAC biscuit s, made without coconut NZ Life 059.JPG A pavlova garnished with strawberries, bananas, kiwifruit and cream. Damper (food).jpg Damper (soda bread) being cooked over hot coals. ] [ Take-away food in Australia ] { fish and chips. } Similar to other Western nations, Australia has a wide variety of takeaway food available from other cultures. The meat pie and sausage rolls are take-away food items, and there are also gourmet pies. Found in some takeaway shops is the &quot; Australian Hamburger &quot;. This is mainly distinguished from other hamburgers by the range of fillings available. An order with all fillings is known as &quot; The Lot &quot; or &quot; The Works &quot;. The fillings include lettuce, tomato, cheese, pickled beetroot, fried onion, bacon, and a fried egg. American fast food outlets are common, and there are also Australian fast food chains and individual outlets selling pizza, charcoal or fried chicken, kebab s, gyros, and fish and chip shop s. Doner kebab - usually called just kebabs - are very popular owing to immigration from Greece, Turkey, the former Yugoslavia, and Lebanon. Shops or vans selling kebab s are colloquially referred to as &quot; Kebaberies &quot; and &quot; Kebabavans &quot; in some parts of Australia. In Melbourne, they are also know as souvlaki and in South Australia they are called yiros. Kebab meat can also be found as a pizza topping in the western suburbs of Sydney and Melbourne, as a &quot; beef pizza &quot; or &quot; Turkish pizza &quot;. Doner kebabs in Sydney and Melbourne can be served with all the ingredients placed onto or next to the pita bread on a plate, or more commonly, with the ingredients rolled into the pita bread in the form of a &quot; wrap &quot;. The &quot; late night kebab &quot; has become an icon of urban food culture in Australia, with kebabs often purchased and consumed following a night of drinking. Kebabs are considered suitable following consumption of alcohol, due their high content of lipid s (fats) which aids in metabolism of alcohol. A very wide variety of Chinese, Indian, Vietnamese and various Asian restaurants provide eat-in and take-away services, and are very popular in the cities. With the high levels of immigration from the Middle East, South Asia, Korea, China and other countries from all over the world to Australia, many authentic and high-quality restaurants are run by first and second generation immigrants from these areas. Chinese cuisine ranges from a long established Australian-Chinese style based on the cooking of the Chinese community established during the gold rushes of the late 19th century, to quite different cuisine more recently imported from different regions of China. Asian bakery stores are also a source of fast food such as savoury rolls. Examples of these include cheese and bacon, cheese and pineapple, which are toppings over a thick piece of bread, and the pork/chicken roll ( Banh Mi Thit ), which is a crusty baguette, cut with sliced pork or chicken, carrot, spring onion, soy sauce, pâté, coriander, cucumber and often chili. [ Prominent Australian chefs ] Prominent Australian chefs include: [ 5 ] Stephanie Alexander Maggie Beer Guillaume Brahimi Jean-Paul Bruneteau George Calombaris Margaret Fulton Gabriel Gaté Peter Gilmore Bill Granger Guy Grossi Kylie Kwong Cheong Liew Stefano Manfredi Gary Mehigan Matt Moran Luke Nguyen Mark Olive Ben O&apos;Donoghue Neil Perry Tobie Puttock Peter Russell-Clarke Cindy Sargon Curtis Stone David Thompson Tetsuya Wakuda [ See also ] [ Food ] Australian wine Culture of Australia [ Notes ] [ July 2011 ] [ 2 ] [ References ] Bruneteau, Jean-Paul, Tukka, Real Australian Food, ISBN 0-207-18966-8 Cherikoff, Vic, The Bushfood Handbook, ISBN 0-7316-6904-5 Cherikoff, Vic, Uniquely Australian, ISBN 0-646-07470-9 Cherikoff, Vic and Christie, Benjamin, The Dining Downunder cookbook. ISBN 0-9752021-0-3 Dwyer, Andrew, &quot; Outback Recipes and Stories from the Campfire &quot;. ISBN 978-0-522-85380-3 Kersh, Jennice. &amp; Kersh, Raymond. (1998) Edna&apos;s Table (Restaurant) Rydalmere, N.S.W. Hodder &amp; Stoughton. ISBN 0-7336-0539-7 [ External links ] [ Cuisine of Australia ] Australian food and drink - Native Australians and early settlers Australian Flavour - Recipes verified as having been cooked in Australian in the late 1800s and 1900s plus others considered iconic Regency TAFE information website Australian Food Worldwide [ cuisine ] Category:Australian cuisine ar:مطبخ أسترالي de:Australische Küche es:Gastronomía de Australia fr:Cuisine australienne pl:Kuchnia australijska pt:Culinária da Austrália ru:Австралийская кухня sv:Australiska köket uk:Австралійська кухня vi:Ẩm thực Úc