[ Modena Comune di Modena Modena Palazzo Comunale e Duomo.jpg Modena Cathedral (left) and City Hall (right) Stemma Modena.png 44 39 N 10 56 E title Emilia-Romagna Modena (MO) Albareto, Baggiovara, Ca&apos; Fusara, Cognento, Cittanova, Collegara, Ganaceto, Lesignana, Marzaglia, Navicello, Portile, San Damaso, San Donnino, Tre Olmi, Villanova Democratic Party Giorgio Pighi 182.7 183069 21 December 2009 Modenesi 34 San Geminiano January 31 41100 059 ] Modena ( [ ˈmɔːdena lang It-Modena.ogg ]; Modenese : Mòdna; [ Mutina ] ) is a city and comune ( municipality ) on the south side of the Po Valley, in the Province of Modena in the Emilia-Romagna region of Italy. An ancient town, it is the seat of an archbishop, but is now best known as &quot; the capital of engines &quot;, since the factories of the famous Italian sports car makers Ferrari, De Tomaso, Lamborghini, Pagani and Maserati are, or were, located here and all, except Lamborghini, have headquarters in the city or nearby. Lamborghini is headquartered not far away in Sant&apos;Agata Bolognese, in the adjacent Province of Bologna. One of Ferrari&apos;s cars, the 360 Modena, was named after the town itself. Also, one of the colors for Ferraris is Modena yellow. The University of Modena, founded in 1175 and expanded by Francesco II d&apos;Este in 1686, has traditional strengths in economics, medicine and law and is the second oldest athenaeum in Italy, sixth in the whole world [ April 2011 ]. Italian officers are trained at the Italian Military Academy, located in Modena, and partly housed in the Baroque Ducal Palace. The Biblioteca Estense houses historical volumes and 3,000 manuscripts. Modena is well known in culinary circles for its production of balsamic vinegar and also for its Military Academy, Italy&apos;s &quot; Westpoint &quot;, which is housed in the Ducal Palace. Famous Modenesi include Mary of Modena, the Queen consort of England and Scotland; operatic tenor Luciano Pavarotti (1935–2007) and soprano Mirella Freni, born in Modena itself; Enzo Ferrari (1898–1988) eponymous founder of the Ferrari motor company; the Catholic Priest and Senior Exorcist of Vatican Gabriele Amorth; and the rock singer Vasco Rossi who was born in Zocca, one of the 47 comuni in the Province of Modena. [ Geography ] Modena lies on the Pianura Padana, and is bounded by the two rivers Secchia and Panaro, both affluents of the Po River. Their presence is symbolized by the Two Rivers Fountain in the city&apos;s center, by Giuseppe Graziosi. The city is connected to the Panaro by the Naviglio channel. The Apennines ranges begin some 10  km from the city, to the south. The commune is divided into four circoscrizioni. These are: Centro storico (Historical Center, San Cataldo) Crocetta (San Lazzaro-East Modena, Crocetta) Buon Pastore (Buon Pastore, Sant&apos;Agnese, San Damaso) San Faustino (S.Faustino-Saliceta San Giuliano, Madonnina-Quattro Ville) Modena has a temperate climate. It experiences hot, humid summers with little rainfall and cold, damp winters. [ History ] [ Ancient times ] The territory around Modena (Latin: Mutina, Etruscan: Muoina) was inhabited by the Villanovan s in the Iron Age, and later by Ligurian tribes, Etruscans, and the Gaulish Boii (the settlement itself being Etruscan). Although the exact date of its foundation is unknown, it is known that it was already in existence in the 3rd century BC, for in 218 BC, during Hannibal &apos;s invasion of Italy, the Boii revolted and laid siege to the city. Livy described it as a fortified citadel where Roman magistrates took shelter. The outcome of the siege is not known, but the city was most likely abandoned after Hannibal&apos;s arrival. Mutina was refounded as a Roman colony in 183 BC, to be used as a military base by Marcus Aemilius Lepidus, causing the Ligurians to sack it in 177 BC. Nonetheless, it was rebuilt, and quickly became the most important centre in Cisalpine Gaul, both because of its strategic importance and because it was on an important crossroads between Via Aemilia and the road going to Verona. A view of Piazza Grande In the 1st century BC Mutina was besieged twice. The first siege was by Pompey in 78 BC, when Mutina was defended by Marcus Junius Brutus (a populist leader, not to be confused with his son, Caesar&apos;s best known assassin). The city eventually surrendered out of hunger, and Brutus fled, only to be slain in Regium Lepidi. In the civil war following Caesar&apos;s assassination, the city was besieged once again, this time by Mark Antony, in 44 BC, and defended by Decimus Junius Brutus. Octavian relieved the city with the help of the Senate. Cicero called it Mutina splendidissima ( &quot; most beautiful Mutina &quot; ) in his Philippics (44 BC). Until the 3rd century AD, it kept its position as the most important city in the newly formed Aemilia province, but the fall of the Empire brought Mutina down with it, as it was used as a military base both against the barbarians and in the civil wars. It is said that Mutina was never sacked by Attila, for a dense fog hid it (a miracle said to be provided by Saint Geminianus, bishop and patron of Modena), but it was eventually buried by a great flood in the 7th century and abandoned. As of December, 2008, Italian researchers have discovered the pottery center where the oil lamps that lit the ancient Roman empire were made. Evidence of the pottery workshops emerged in Modena, in central-northern Italy, during construction work to build a residential complex near the ancient walls of the city. &quot; We found a large ancient Roman dumping filled with pottery scraps. There were vases, bottles, bricks, but most of all, hundreds of oil lamps, each bearing their maker&apos;s name &quot;, Donato Labate, the archaeologist in charge of the dig, stated. [ Middle Ages ] Its exiles founded a new city a few miles to the northwest, still represented by the village of Cittanova (literally &quot; new city &quot; ). About the end of the 9th century, Modena was restored and refortified by its bishop, Ludovicus. At about this time the Song of the Watchmen of Modena was composed. Later the city was part of the possessions of the Countess Matilda of Tuscany, becoming a free commune starting from the 12th century. In the wars between Emperor Frederick II and Pope Gregory IX Modena sided with the emperor. The Este family were identified as lords of Modena from 1288 ( Obizzo d&apos;Este ). After the death of Obizzo&apos;s successor ( Azzo VIII, in 1308) the commune reasserted itself, but by 1336 the Este family was permanently in power. Under Borso d&apos;Este Modena was made a duchy. [ Modern age ] Enlarged and fortified by Ercole II, it was made the primary ducal residence when Ferrara, the main Este seat, fell to the Pope in 1598. Francesco I d&apos;Este, Duke of Modena (1629–1658) built the citadel and began the palace, which was largely embellished by Francesco II. In the 18th century, Rinaldo d&apos;Este was twice driven from his city by French invasions, and Francesco III built many of Modena&apos;s public buildings, but the Este pictures were sold and many of them wound up in Dresden. Ercole III died in exile at Treviso, having refused Napoleonic offers of compensation when Modena was made part of the Napoleonic Cispadane Republic. His only daughter, Maria Beatrice d&apos;Este, married Ferdinand I, Archduke of Austria-Este, son of Empress Maria Theresa of Austria; and in 1814 their eldest son, Francis IV, received back the estates of the Este. Quickly, in 1816, he dismantled the fortifications that might well have been used against him and began Modena&apos;s years under Austrian rule which, despite being just, constitutional and fair, nevertheless had to face another foreign-inspired rebellion in 1830, this time happily unsuccessful. His son Francis V was also a just ruler and famously tended the victims of war and cholera with his own hands. However, he too had to face yet more foreign-inspired revolutions and was temporarily expelled from Modena in the European Revolutions of 1848. He was restored, amidst wide popular acclaim, by Austrian troops. Ten years later, on August 20, 1859, the revolutionaries again invaded (this time the Piedmontese), annexing Modena into the revolutionary Savoyard nation of Italy as a territorial part of the Kingdom of Italy. { Cathedral } Interior of the Cathedral Piazza Grande, with the Cathedral and the Communal Palace. { Ducal Palace of Modena (now a military academy) } [ Main sights ] [ The Cathedral and the Ghirlandina ] The Cathedral of Modena and the annexed campanile are a UNESCO World Heritage Site. Begun under the direction of the Countess Matilda of Tuscany with its first stone laid June 6, 1099 and its crypt ready for the city&apos;s patron, Saint Geminianus, and consecrated only six years later, the Duomo of Modena was finished in 1184. The building of a great cathedral in this flood-prone ravaged former center of Arianism was an act of urban renewal in itself, and an expression of the flood of piety that motivated the contemporary First Crusade. Unusually, the master builder&apos;s name, Lanfranco, was celebrated in his own day: the city&apos;s chronicler expressed the popular confidence in the master-mason from Como, Lanfranco: by God&apos;s mercy the man was found (inventus est vir). The sculptor Wiligelmus who directed the mason&apos;s yard was praised in the plaque that commemorated the founding. The program of the sculpture is not lost in a welter of detail: the wild dangerous universe of the exterior is mediated by the Biblical figures of the portals leading to the Christian world of the interior. In Wiligelmus&apos; sculpture at Modena, the human body takes on a renewed physicality it had lost in the schematic symbolic figures of previous centuries. At the east end, three apse s reflect the division of the body of the cathedral into nave and wide aisles with their bold, solid masses. Modena&apos;s Duomo inspired campaigns of cathedral and abbey building in emulation through the valley of the Po. The Gothic campanile (1224–1319) is called Torre della Ghirlandina from the bronze garland surrounding the weathercock. [ Ducal Palace ] [ Ducal Palace of Modena ] The Ducal Palace, begun by Francesco I d&apos;Este in 1634 and finished by Francis V, was the seat of the Este court from the 17-19th century. The palace occupies the site of the former Este Castle, once located in the periphery of the city. Although generally credited to Bartolomeo Avanzini, it has been suggested that advice and guidance in the design process had been sought from the contemporary luminaries, Cortona, Bernini, and Borromini. The Palace currently houses the Accademia Militare di Modena, the Military Museum and a precious Library. The Palace has a Baroque façade from which the Honour Court, where the military ceremonies are held, and the Honour Staircase can be accessed. The Central Hall has a frescoed ceiling with the 17th century Incoronation of Bradamante by Marco Antonio Franceschini. The Salottino d&apos;Oro ( &quot; Golden Hall &quot; ), covered with gilted removable panels, was used by Duke Francis III as his main cabinet of work. [ Town Hall ] Facing the Piazza Grande (a UNESCO World Heritage Site), the Town Hall of Modena was put together in the 17th-18th centuries from several pre-existing edifices built from 1046 as municipal offices. It is characterized by a Clock Tower (Torre dell&apos;Orologio, late 15th century), once paired with another tower (Torre Civica) demolished after an earthquake in 1671. In the interior, noteworthy is the Sala del Fuoco ( &quot; Fire Hall &quot; ), with a painted frieze by Niccolò dell&apos;Abbate (1546) portraying famous characters from Ancient Rome against a typical Emilia background. The Camerino dei Confirmati ( &quot; Chamber of the Confirmed &quot; ) houses one of the symbols of the city, the Secchia Rapita, a bucket kept in memory of the victorious Battle of Zappolino (1325) against Bologna. This relic inspired the poem of the same title by Alessandro Tassoni. Another relic from the Middle Ages in Modena is the Preda Ringadora, a rectangular marble stone next to the palace porch, used as a speakers&apos; platform, and the statue called La Bonissima ( &quot; The Very Good &quot; ): the latter, portraying a female figure, was erected in the square in 1268 and later installed over the porch. [ Museum Palace ] The Palace Museum, on the St. Augustine square, is an example of civil architecture from the Este period, built as a Hostel for the Poor together with the nearby Hospital in the late 18th century. Today it houses the main museums of Modena: Estense Gallery, with works by Tintoretto, Paolo Veronese, Guido Reni, Correggio, Cosmé Tura and brothers Annibale and Agostino Carracci. The most famous works are the two portraits of Francis I d&apos;Este, a sculpture by Gian Lorenzo Bernini and a canvas by Diego Velázquez. Estense Library, one of the most important libraries in Italy. Museum of Mediaeval and Modern Art. Municipal Museum of Risorgimento. Este Headstones Museum. Graziosi Chalks Gallery. Archaeological and Ethnological Museum. [ Other churches ] San Vincenzo was erected in the 17th century over a church known from the 13th century. The works were begun by Paolo Reggiano, who was followed by Bernardo Castagnini, probably helped by the young Guarino Guarini. The interior contains frescoes by Sigismondo Caula portraying episodes of the life of Saint Vincent and Saint Cajetan. The dome was destroyed during World War II. This church houses the funerary monuments of the Este Dukes. Santa Maria della Pomposa (also known as Aedes Muratoriana) is probably the most ancient religious edifice, being mentioned as early as 1135. Little remains of the original Middle Ages temple can be seen. The church is mainly linked to Ludovico Antonio Muratori, who was its parish priest from 1716 to 1750 and rebuilt it almost from scratch. The church of San Giovanni Decollato ( &quot; St. John Baptist Beheaded &quot; ) was built in the 16th century over a pre-existing temple dedicated to St. Michael, and modified in the 18th century. The church of St. Augustine was built in the 14th century, but largely renovated for the funerals of Alfonso IV d&apos;Este in 1663. The sober original structure has now 17th stuccoes and a panelled ceiling. The most notable artwork is the Deposition (1476) by the Modenese Antonio Begarelli, once in the church of St. John the Baptist. Traces of a 14th century fresco by Tommaso da Modena can still be seen. The church of St. Francis was built by the Franciscan s from 1244, and finished after more than two centuries. A sober Gothic-style edifice, it houses one of Begarelli &apos;s masterworks, a Deposition of Christ made up of thirteen statues. { Synagogue } The church of St. Peter was erected, according to tradition, over the temple of Jupiter Capitulinus. The current edifice is from 1476, built next to a Benedictine abbey founded in 996 oustide the city walls, and is one of the few Renaissance architecture in Modena. The interior has a precious 15th century organ and numerous terracotta works by Begarelli. The campanile is from 1629. The church of St. George is also known as the Sanctuary of the Blessed Virgin Helper of the Modenese People, who boasts a venerated image over the high altar. The latter is a work in polychrome marbles by Antonio Loraghi (1666). The church has a Greek plan and was constructed from 1647. [ Synagogue ] The Synagogue, next to the Palazzo Comunale, was built by the Jewish Community of Modena in Lombardesque style and inaugurated in 1873. [ Other points of interest ] Orto Botanico dell&apos;Università di Modena e Reggio Emilia, a botanical garden [ Culture ] [ Teatro Comunale Modena ] The Teatro Comunale Modena (Community Theatre of Modena, but renamed in October 2007 as Teatro Comunale Luciano Pavarotti) is an opera house in the town of Modena, ( Emilia-Romagna province), Italy. The idea for the creation of the present theatre dates from 1838, when it became apparent that the then-existing Teatro Comunale di via Emilia (in dual private and public ownership) was no longer suitable for staging opera. However, this house had been the venue for presentations of all of the works of Donizetti, Bellini and Rossini up to this time, and a flourishing operatic culture existed in Modena. Under the Mayor of Modena in collaboration with the Conservatorio dell&apos;Illustrissima Comunita (Conservatory of the Most Illustrious Community), architect Francesco Vandelli was engaged to design the Teatro dell&apos;Illustrissima Comunita, as the theatre was first called, &quot; for the dignity of the city and for the transmission of the scenic arts &quot;. { Quoted in Lynn, p.191 } Paid for in the manner typical of the time - from the sale of boxes - in addition to a significant gift from Duke Friedrich IV, Vandelli created a design for the new theatre combining ideas from those in Piacenza, Mantua, and Milan, and it opened on 2 October 1841 with a performance of Gandini&apos;s Adelaide di Borgogna al Castello di Canossa, an opera specially commissioned for the occasion. [ Cuisine ] { Cotechino Modena &quot;, as served with } { polenta and } { lentils. } Modena has a rich and diversified cuisine, often including meats, hams and salamis. One of the most famous Modenese dishes is &quot; Zampone &quot; (the fatter and heartier version) or &quot; Cotechino Modena &quot; (Cotechino is leaner and less fat than Zampone). Cotechino dates back to around 1511 to Mirandola, where, whilst besieged, the people had to find a way to preserve meat and use the less tender cuts, so made the cotechino. By the 18th century it had become more popular than the yellowish sausage had been around at the time, and in the 19th century was in mass production in and around the area. Modena&apos;s contribution to the Italian pasta culture are tortellini and tortelloni which are squares of pasta shaped in the form of a ring and stuffed with meat or cheese. &quot; Cappello da prete &quot; is also a popular meal, which is a very fatty pig&apos;s trotter. Other dishes include &quot; Torta Barozzi &quot; or &quot; Torta Nera &quot;, which is a black tart (a dessert made with a coffee/cocoa and almond filling encased in a fine pastry dough), &quot; Ciccioli &quot;, which is a pig&apos;s head served cold, and &quot; Pesto modenese &quot;, which is cured pork back fat pounded with garlic, rosemary and Parmigiano-Reggiano used to fill tigelle, borlenghi and crescentine. [ Economy ] Panini Group, including Panini Comics, is headquartered in Modena. { &quot; Corporate Info. &quot; } { Panini Group. Retrieved on 5 September 2009. } [ Automobile legacy ] { Maserati GranTurismo } Modena is, along with Turin, one of Italy&apos;s main centres of the automotive industry, and has a long automobile legacy. The iconic Ferrari supercar was founded in Modena by Modenese car manufacturer Enzo Ferrari. Several Italian supercars such as Pagani, De Tomaso, Lamborghini, Maserati and Bugatti were either founded or are currently headquartered or built within a few kilometers from the city. [ Transport ] [ Rail ] Modena railway station, opened in 1859, forms part of the Milan–Bologna railway, and is also a terminus of two secondary railways, linking Modena with Verona and Sassuolo, respectively. [ Urban transport ] Modena&apos;s urban public transport network is operated by SETA. The network includes the Modena trolleybus system. [ Demographics ] In 2007, there were 179,937 people residing in Modena located in the province of Modena, Emilia-Romagna, of whom 48.1% were male and 51.9% were female. Minors (children ages 18 and younger) totalled 16.20 percent of the population compared to pensioners who number 22.54 percent. This compares with the Italian average of 18.06 percent (minors) and 19.94 percent (pensioners). The average age of Modena resident is 44 compared to the Italian average of 42. In the five years between 2002 and 2007, the population of Modena experienced 2.42% growth, while Italy as a whole grew by 3.56 percent. [ http://demo.istat.it/bil2002/index.html Statistiche demografiche ISTAT Demo.istat.it 2011-04-05 ] [ http://demo.istat.it/bil2007/index.html Statistiche demografiche ISTAT Demo.istat.it 2011-04-05 ] The current birth rate of Modena is 9.62 births per 1,000 inhabitants compared to the Italian average of 9.45 births. As of 2006, 89.61% of the population was Italian. The largest foreign group comes from other parts of Europe (namely Romania and Albania ): 3.94%, followed by North Africa: 2.40%, and sub-saharan Africa : 1.94%. [ Sport ] Modena has a strong sporting tradition, linked mainly to motor racing as the birthplace of Enzo Ferrari, founder of the eponymous motor racing team and car manufacturer which is based in nearby Maranello. The Ferrari 360 Modena was named after the city. Indeed, Modena is known as the World&apos;s &apos;Supercar Capital&apos;, being the nearest large town to the homes of Maserati, Lamborghini, Pagani and previously also Bugatti and De Tomaso. The city&apos;s football club, Modena F.C., plays in Serie B, the Italian second division. Volleyball plays an important role in Modena&apos;s sport history, with Panini Modena club having won 11 National championships, 4 Champion&apos;s League seasons and a handful of other trophies. [ International relations ] [ List of twin towns and sister cities in Italy ] [ Twin towns — Sister cities ] Modena is twinned with: [ Kazakhstan ] [ Austria ] [ Brazil ] [ Serbia ] [ USA ] Almaty, Kazakhstan Linz, Austria Londrina, Brazil Novi Sad, Serbia Saint Paul, USA [ See also ] Duchy of Modena and Reggio Jewish Community of Modena List of Dukes of Ferrara and of Modena New Holland Agriculture [ References ] [ External links ] [ Modena ] Official website of the Modena Tourist Information Office - in English Teatro Communale information from the Modena website Introduction to Modena cathedral, illustrated Description of the cathedral Modena Photo Gallery Pictures of Modena Meteo Modena Weather cam located in Modena Webcam Modena Street webcam located Via Sauro, downtown Modena Ancient Roman Oil Lamp &apos;Factory Town&apos; Found Modena info city of Modena Category:Cities and towns in Emilia-Romagna Category:Former countries on the Italian Peninsula Category:World Heritage Sites in Italy af:Modena ar:مودينا az:Modena be:Горад Модэна br:Modena bg:Модена bs:Modena ca:Mòdena cs:Modena cy:Modena da:Modena de:Modena et:Modena eml:Mòdna es:Módena eo:Modeno eu:Modena fa:مودنا fr:Modène gl:Módena - Modena ko:모데나 hr:Modena io:Modena id:Modena ia:Modena it:Modena he:מודנה ka:მოდენა sw:Modena la:Mutina lv:Modena lt:Modena lmo:Modena hu:Modena ms:Modena nah:Modena nl:Modena (stad) ja:モデナ nap:Modena no:Modena nn:Modena oc:Modena pnb:موڈینا pms:Mòdena pl:Modena pt:Módena ro:Modena qu:Modena ru:Модена scn:Mòdena simple:Modena sk:Modena sr:Модена sh:Modena fi:Modena sv:Modena tl:Modena (lungsod) roa-tara:Modena tr:Modena uk:Модена vec:Modena vi:Modena vo:Modena war:Modena zh:摩德納