[ Hugo de Groot the KLM plane crash KLM Flight 607-E ] [ Western philosophy 17th-century philosophy #B0C4DE Michiel Jansz van Mierevelt - Hugo Grotius.jpg thumb 230px Hugo Grotius - Portrait by Michiel Jansz. van Mierevelt, 1631 Hugo Grotius 10 April 1583 Delft, Holland, Dutch Republic 28 August 1645 Rostock, Swedish Pomerania Natural law, Social contract, Humanism, Scholasticism Philosophy of war, International law, Political philosophy, Theology Aristotle, the Bible, Cicero, Erasmus, Vitoria, Gentili, Bodin, Suárez Selden, Hobbes, Cumberland, Pufendorf, Locke, Vico, Bynkershoek, Barbeyrac, Vattel, Rousseau, Kant, Proudhon, Scottish Enlightenment, American Founding Fathers Early theorist of natural rights, sought to ground just war principles in natural law, defended principle of pacta sunt servanda ] Page written in Grotius&apos; hand from the manuscript of &apos;&apos;De Indis&apos;&apos; (circa 1604-05). Hugo Grotius (10 April 1583 – 28 August 1645), also known as Huig de Groot, Hugo Grocio or Hugo de Groot, was a jurist in the Dutch Republic. With Francisco de Vitoria and Alberico Gentili he laid the foundations for international law, based on natural law. He was also a philosopher, theologian, Christian apologist, playwright, and poet. Grotius&apos;s influence on international law is paramount, and is acknowledged by, for instance, the American Society of International Law, which since 1999 holds an annual series of Grotius Lectures. Additionally, his contributions to Arminian theology provided the seeds for later Arminian-based movements, such as Methodism and Pentecostalism and he is acknowledged as a significant figure in the Arminianism-Calvinism debate. [ Early life ] Born in Delft during the Dutch Revolt, Hugo was the first child of Jan de Groot and Alida van Overschie. His father was a man of learning, once having studied with the eminent Justus Lipsius at Leiden, as well as of political distinction, and he groomed his son from an early age in a traditional humanist and Aristotelian education. A prodigious learner, Hugo entered the University of Leiden when he was just eleven years old. There he studied with some of the most acclaimed intellectuals in northern Europe, including Franciscus Junius, Joseph Justus Scaliger, and Rudolph Snellius. { See Vreeland (1919), chapter 1 } At age sixteen he published his first book: a scholarly edition of the late antique author Martianus Capella &apos;s work on the seven liberal arts, Martiani Minei Felicis Capellæ Carthaginiensis viri proconsularis Satyricon, in quo De nuptiis Philologiæ &amp; Mercurij libri duo, &amp; De septem artibus liberalibus libri singulares. Omnes, &amp; emendati, &amp; Notis, siue Februis Hug. Grotii illustrati. [ Stahl William H. 1965 To a Better Understanding of Martianus Capella Speculum 40 104 ] In Holland, Grotius earned an appointment as advocate to The Hague in 1599 and then as official historiographer for the States of Holland in 1601. His first occasion to write systematically on issues of international justice came in 1604, when he became involved in the legal proceedings following the seizure by Dutch merchants of a Portuguese carrack and its cargo in the Singapore Strait. [ De Indis and Mare Liberum ] The Dutch were at war with Spain and Portugal when the loaded merchant ship Santa Catarina, a Portuguese carrack, was captured by captain Jacob van Heemskerk off present-day Singapore in 1603. Heemskerk was employed with the United Amsterdam Company (part of the Dutch East India Company ), and though he did not have authorization from the company or the government to initiate the use of force, many shareholders were eager to accept the riches that he brought back to them. Not only was the legality of keeping the prize questionable under Dutch statute, but a faction of shareholders (mostly Mennonite ) in the Company also objected to the forceful seizure on moral grounds, and of course, the Portuguese demanded the return of their cargo. The scandal led to a public judicial hearing and a wider campaign to sway public (and international) opinion. It was in this wider context that representatives of the Company called upon Grotius to draft a polemic al defence of the seizure. { See Ittersum (2006), chapter 1. } The result of Grotius&apos; efforts in 1604-1605 was a long, theory-laden treatise that he provisionally entitled De Indis (On the Indies). Grotius sought to ground his defense of the seizure in terms of the natural principles of justice. In this, he had cast a net much wider than the case at hand; his interest was in the source and ground of war&apos;s lawfulness in general. The treatise was never published in full during Grotius&apos; lifetime, perhaps because the court ruling in favor of the Company preempted the need to garner public support. The manuscript was not made public until it was uncovered from Grotius&apos; estate in 1864 and published under the title, De Jure Praedae (On the Right of Capture). The principles that Grotius developed there, however, laid the basis for his mature work on international justice, De jure belli ac pacis, and in fact one chapter of the earlier work did make it to the press in the form of the influential pamphlet, Mare Liberum. { Michiel Jansz. van Mierevelt, 1608. } In The Free Sea ( Mare Liberum, published 1609) Grotius formulated the new principle that the sea was international territory and all nation s were free to use it for seafaring trade. Grotius, by claiming &apos;free seas&apos; ( Freedom of the seas ), provided suitable ideological justification for the Dutch breaking up of various trade monopolies through its formidable naval power (and then establishing its own monopoly). England, competing fiercely with the Dutch for domination of world trade, opposed this idea and claimed That the Dominion of the British Sea, or That Which Incompasseth the Isle of Great Britain, is, and Ever Hath Been, a Part or Appendant of the Empire of that Island. { Selden, John. Mare Clausum. Of the Dominion, or, Ownership of the sea. Book One. } William Welwod, a Scottish jurist who was the first to formulate the laws of the sea in the English language, argued against Grotius&apos; Mare Liberum in An Abridgement of All Sea-Lawes (1613), eliciting a response from Grotius around 1615 under the title Defensio capitis quinti Maris Liberi oppugnati a Gulielmo Welwodo ( &quot; Defense of chapter five of the &apos;Free Oceans,&apos; opposed by William Welwod &quot; ). In Mare clausum (1635) John Selden endeavoured to prove that the sea was in practice virtually as capable of appropriation as terrestrial territory. As conflicting claims grew out of the controversy, maritime states came to moderate their demands and base their maritime claims on the principle that it extended seawards from land. A workable formula was found by Cornelius Bynkershoek in his De dominio maris (1702), restricting maritime dominion to the actual distance within which cannon range could effectively protect it. This became universally adopted and developed into the three-mile limit. The dispute would eventually have important economic implications. The Dutch Republic supported the idea of free trade (even though it imposed a special trade monopoly on nutmeg and clove s in the Moluccas ). England adopted the Act of Navigation (1651), forbidding any goods from entering England except on English ships. The Act subsequently led to the First Anglo-Dutch War (1652–1654). [ Arminian controversy, arrest and exile ] [ History of Calvinist–Arminian debate ] [ Ordinum Hollandiae ac Westfrisiae pietas ] Aided by his continued association with Van Oldenbarnevelt, Grotius made considerable advances in his political career, being retained as Oldenbarnevelt&apos;s resident advisor in 1605, Advocate General of the Fisc of Holland, Zeeland and Friesland in 1607, and then as Pensionary of Rotterdam (the equivalent of a mayoral office) in 1613. { Vreeland (1919), chapter 3. } In 1608 he married Maria van Reigersbergen, with whom he would have eight children (four surviving beyond youth) and who would be invaluable in helping him and the family to weather the storm to come. In these years a great theological controversy broke out between the chair of theology at Leiden Jacobus Arminius and his followers (who are called Arminians or Remonstrants ) and the strongly Calvinist theologian, Franciscus Gomarus whose supporters are termed Gomarists or Counter-Remonstrants. Leiden University &quot; was under the authority of the States of Holland - they were responsible, among other things, for the policy concerning appointments at this institution, which was governed in their name by a board of Curators - and, in the final instance, the States were responsible for dealing with any cases of heterodoxy among the professors. &quot; [ Hugo Grotius: Ordinum Hollandiae ac Westfrisiae Pietas, 1613. Edwin Rabbie 1995 Brill ] The domestic dissension resulting over Arminius&apos; professorship was overshadowed by the continuing war with Spain, and the professor died in 1609 on the eve of the Twelve Years&apos; Truce. The new peace would move the people&apos;s focus to the controversy and Arminius&apos; followers. In 1610, several months after the death of their leader, the Arminians issued a &apos; Remonstrance &apos; declaring their doctrinal differences with the mainstream Reformed doctrines of salvation, most often associated with the Protestant Reformer John Calvin, but also held by most Reformed pastors and theologians throughout Europe. They had particular problems with the Belgic Confession, art. 16, on eternal election and reprobation. The Remonstrants did not reject the doctrines of election or predestination, as is often assumed, but rather redefined them so that the decisive factor in a person&apos;s salvation is not God&apos;s inscrutable decree, but the individual&apos;s faith, which is eternally foreknown by God. According to Arminius and the Remonstrants, God decrees to elect all who meet the condition of faith. The controversy expanded when the Remonstrant theologian Conrad Vorstius was appointed to replace Jacobus Arminius as the theology chair at Leiden. Vorstius was soon seen by Counter-Remonstrants as moving beyond the teachings of Arminius into Socinianism and accused of teaching irreligion. Leading the call for Vorstius&apos; removal was theology professor Sibrandus Lubbertus. On the other side Johannes Wtenbogaert (a Remonstrant leader) and Johan van Oldenbarnevelt, Grand Pensionary of Holland had strongly promoted the appointment of Vortius and began to defend their actions. Gomarus resigned his professorship at Leyden in protest that Vorstius was not removed. The Counter-Remonstrants were also supported in their opposition by King James I of England &quot; who thundered loudly against the Leyden nomination and gaudily depicted Vorstius as a horrid heretic. He ordered his books to be publicly burnt in London, Cambridge, and Oxford, and he exerted continual pressure through his ambassador in the Hauge, Ralph Winwood, to get the appointment cancelled. &quot; [ Ecclesia reformata: Studies on the Reformation Willem Nijenhuis Leiden, Netherlands Brill 1972-1994 ] James began to shift his confidence from Oldenbarnevt towards Maurice. Grotius joined the controversy by defending the civil authorities power to appoint (independent of the wishes of religious authorities) whomever they wished to a university&apos;s faculty. He did this by writing Ordinum Pietas &quot; a pamphlet...directed against an opponent, the Calvinist Franeker professor Lubbertus; it was ordered by Grotius&apos; masters the States of Holland, and thus written for the occasion - though Grotius may already have had plans for such a book. &quot; [ Hugo Grotius Theologian - Essays in Honor of G.H.M. Posthumus Meyjes Henk J.M. Nellen &amp; Edwin Rabbie De Imperio Summarum Potestatum Circa Sacra Harm-Jan Van Dam E.J. Brill 1994 New York ] The work is twenty-seven pages long, is &quot; polemical and acrimonious &quot; and only two-thirds of it speaks directly about ecclesiastical politics (mainly of synods and offices). The work met with a violent reaction from the Counter-Remonstrants, and &quot; It might be said that all Grotius&apos; next works until his arrest in 1618 form a vain attempt to repair the damage done by this book. &quot; Grotius would later write De Satisfactione aiming &quot; at proving that the Arminians are far from being Socinians. &quot; Led by Oldenbarnevelt, the States of Holland took an official position of religious toleration towards Remonstrants and Counter-Remonstrants. Grotius, (who acted during the controversy first as Attorney General of Holland, and later as a member of the Committee of Counsellors) was eventually asked to draft an edict to express the policy of toleration. { A translation edict is printed in full in the appendix to Vreeland (1919). } This edict, Decretum pro pace ecclesiarum was completed in late 1613 or early 1614. The edict put into practice a view that Grotius had been developing in his writings on church and state (see Erastianism ): that only the basic tenets necessary for undergirding civil order (e.g., the existence of God and His providence ) ought to be enforced while differences on obscure theological doctrines should be left to private conscience. { See his manuscript for Meletius (1611) and the more systematic De imperio summarum potestatum circa sacra (finished 1617, published 1647). } The edict &quot; imposing moderation and toleration on the ministry &quot;, was backed up by Grotius with &quot; thirty-one pages of quotations, mainly dealing with the Five Remonstrant Articles. &quot; In response to Grotius&apos; Ordinum Pietas, Professor Lubbertus published Responsio Ad Pietatem Hugonis Grotii in 1614, later that year Grotius anonymously published Bona Fides Sibrandi Lubberti in response to Lubbertus. Jacobus Trigland joined Lubberdus in expressing the view that tolerance in matters of doctrine was inadmissible, denouncing Grotius&apos; stance in his 1615 works Den Recht-gematigden Christen: Ofte vande waere Moderatie and Advys Over een Concept van moderatie. [ Property, Piracy and Punishment: Hugo Grotius on War and Booty in De iure praedae Hans W. Blom Brill 2009 ] The edict Grotius penned attempting to enforce toleration did not have the intended effect, and hostilities flared throughout the republic. As anger escalated, it appeared ever more likely that a national synod would be called. Grotius wrote emphatically that such could not take place without the consent of the civil authorities, the States of Holland, and that it was they who must appoint attendees. Grotius hoped that by preventing the church authorities from calling their own synod, an international synod would be called by the civil authorities and attending foreigners from Germany and England would have a beneficial influence on the conflict (such as Overall and Georg Lingelsheim (Counsellor to the Elector Palatine in Heidelberg) both familiar with his works). In late 1615, when Middelburg professor Antonius Walaeus published Het Ampt der Kerckendienaren (a response to Johannes Wtenbogaert &apos;s 1610 Tractaet van &apos;t Ampt ende authoriteit eener hoogher Christelijcke overheid in kerckelijkcke zaken) he sent Grotius a copy out of friendship. This was a work &quot; on the relationship between ecclesiastical and secular government &quot; from the moderate counter-remonstrant viewpoint. In early 1616 Grotius also received the 36 page letter championing a remonstrant view Dissertatio epistolica de Iure magistratus in rebus ecclesiasticis from his friend Gerardus Vossius. The letter was &quot; a general introduction on (in)tolerance, mainly on the subject of predestination and the sacrament...[and] an extensive, detailed and generally unfavourable review of Walaeus&apos; Ampt, stuffed with references to ancient and modern authorities. &quot; When Grotius wrote asking for some notes &quot; he received a treasure-house of ecclesiastical history....offering ammunition to Grotius, who gratefully accepted it &quot;. Around this time (April 1616) Grotius went to Amsterdam as part of his official duties, trying to persuade the civil authorities there to join Holland&apos;s majority view about church politics. In early 1617 Grotius debated the question of giving counter-remonstrants the chance to preach in the Kloosterkerk in The Hauge which had been closed. During this time lawsuits where brought against the States of Holland by counter-remonstrant ministers and riots over the controversy broke out in Amsterdam. As the conflict between civil and religious authorities escalated, in order to maintain civil order Oldenbarnevelt eventually proposed that local authorities be given the power to raise troops (the Sharp Resolution of August 4, 1617). Such a measure putatively undermined the authority of the stadtholder of the republic, Maurice of Nassau, Prince of Orange. Maurice seized the opportunity to solidify the preeminence of the Gomarist s, whom he had supported, and to eliminate the nuisance he perceived in Oldenbarnevelt (the latter had previously brokered the Twelve Years&apos; Truce with Spain in 1609 against Maurice&apos;s wishes). During this time Grotius made another attempt to address ecclesiastical politics by completing De Imperio Summarum Potestatum circa Sacra, on &quot; the relations between the religious and secular authorities...Grotius had even cherished hopes that publication of this book would turn the tide and bring back peace to church and state &quot;. Due to events De Imperio would not be published until 1647 (two years after Grotius&apos; death). What forestalled the publication was Maurice&apos;s ordering the arrest of Oldenbarnevelt and Grotius on 29 August 1618. Ultimately, Oldenbarnevelt was executed, and Grotius was sentenced to life imprisonment in Loevestein castle. In 1618 the Synod of Dort was held ending the Vorstius controversy by declaring him unworthy of the professorship, which was met with the approval of King James&apos; representatives who were in attendance. From his imprisonment in Loevestein, Grotius made a written justification of his position &quot; as to my views on the power of the Christian [civil] authorities in ecclesiastical matters, I refer to my...booklet De Pietate Ordinum Hollandiae and especially to an unpublished book De Imperio summarum potestatum circa sacra, where I have treated the matter in more detail...I may summerize my feelings thus: that the [civil] authorities should scrutinize God&apos;s Word so thoroughly as to be certain to impose nothing which is against it; if they act in this way, they shall in good conscience have control of the public churches and public worship - but without persecuting those who err from the right way. &quot; Because this stripped Church officials of any power some of their members (such as Johannes Althusius in a letter to Lubbertus) declared Grotius&apos; ideas diabolical. In 1621, with the help of his wife and maidservant, Grotius managed to escape the castle in a book chest and fled to Paris. In the Netherlands today, he is mainly famous for this daring escape. Both the Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam and the museum Het Prinsenhof in Delft claim to have the original book chest in their collection. Grotius was well received in Paris by his former acquaintances and was granted a royal pension under Louis XIII. It was there in France that Grotius completed his most famous philosophical works. [ On The Truth of the Christian Religion ] { Netherlands. } While in Paris, Grotius set about rendering into Latin prose a work which he had compiled in prison, providing rudimentary yet systematic arguments for the truth of Christianity. (Showcasing Grotius&apos; skill as a poet, the earlier Dutch version of the work, Bewijs van den waren Godsdienst (pub. 1622), was written entirely in didactic verse.) The Latin work was first published in 1627 as De veritate religionis Christianae. It was the first Protestant textbook in Christian apologetics, and was divided into six books. Part of the text dealt with the emerging questions of historical consciousness concerning the authorship and content of the canonical gospels. Other sections of the work addressed pagan religion, Judaism and Islam. What also distinguished this work in the history of Christian apologetics is its precursor role in anticipating the problems expressed in Eighteenth century Deism, and that Grotius represents the first of the practitioners of legal or juridical apologetics in the defence of Christian belief. Hugely popular, the book was translated from Latin into English, Arabic, Persian and Chinese by Edward Pococke for use in missionary work in the East and remained in print until the end of the nineteenth century. [ Governmental theory of atonement ] Grotius also developed a particular view of the atonement of Christ known as the &quot; Governmental &quot; or &quot; Moral government &quot; theory. He theorized that Jesus&apos; sacrificial death occurred in order for the Father to forgive while still maintaining his just rule over the universe. This idea, further developed by theologians such as John Miley, became one of the prominent views of the atonement in Methodist Arminianism. [ De Jure Belli ac Pacis ] [ De jure belli ac pacis ] Title page from the second edition (Amsterdam 1631) of &apos;&apos;De jure belli ac pacis&apos;&apos;. Living in the times of the Eighty Years&apos; War between Spain and the Netherlands and the Thirty Years&apos; War between Catholic and Protestant European nations (Catholic France being in the otherwise Protestant camp), it is not surprising that Grotius was deeply concerned with matters of conflicts between nations and religions. His most lasting work, begun in prison and published during his exile in Paris, was a monumental effort to restrain such conflicts on the basis of a broad moral consensus. Grotius wrote: Fully convinced...that there is a common law among nations, which is valid alike for war and in war, I have had many and weighty reasons for undertaking to write upon the subject. Throughout the Christian world I observed a lack of restraint in relation to war, such as even barbarous races should be ashamed of; I observed that men rush to arms for slight causes, or no cause at all, and that when arms have once been taken up there is no longer any respect for law, divine or human; it is as if, in accordance with a general decree, frenzy had openly been let loose for the committing of all crimes. { The Law of War and Peace, trans. Francis Kelsey (Carnegie edition, 1925), Prol. sect. 28. } De jure belli ac pacis libri tres (On the Law of War and Peace: Three books) was first published in 1625, dedicated to Grotius&apos; current patron, Louis XIII. The treatise advances a system of principles of natural law, which are held to be binding on all people and nations regardless of local custom. The work is divided into three books: Book I advances his conception of war and of natural justice, arguing that there are some circumstances in which war is justifiable. Book II identifies three &apos;just causes&apos; for war: self-defense, reparation of injury, and punishment; Grotius considers a wide variety of circumstances under which these rights of war attach and when they do not. Book III takes up the question of what rules govern the conduct of war once it has begun; influentially, Grotius argued that all parties to war are bound by such rules, whether their cause is just or not. The arguments of this work constitute a theory of Just War. Roughly, the second book takes up questions of jus ad bellum (justice in the resort to war) and the third, questions of jus in bello (justice in the conduct of war). The way that Grotius conceived of these matters had, together with Francisco de Vitoria &apos;s De potestate civili, a profound influence on the tradition after him and on the later formulation of international law. [ Later years ] Many exiled Remonstrants began to return to the Netherlands after the death of Prince Maurice in 1625 when toleration was granted to them. In 1630 they were allowed complete freedom to build and run churches and schools and to live anywhere in Holland. The Remonstrants guided by Uytenbogaert set up a presbyterial organization. They established a theological seminary at Amsterdam where Grotius came to teach alongside Episcopius, Limborch, Curcellaeus, and Le Clerc. But unlike many others, Grotius refused to ask for pardon since it would imply an admission of guilt, and was denied repatriation despite his repeated requests. Driven out once again after attempting to return to Rotterdam in October 1631, Grotius fled to Hamburg. In 1634 Grotius met the opportunity to serve as Sweden &apos;s ambassador to France. The recently deceased Swedish king, Gustavus Adolphus had been an admirer of Grotius (he was said to have carried a copy of De jure belli ac pacis always in his saddle when leading his troops), { Grotius, Hugo The Rights of War and Peace Book I, Introduction by Tuck, Richard: Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 2005. } and his successor&apos;s regent, Axel Oxenstierna, was keen to have Grotius in his employ. Grotius accepted the offer and took up diplomatic residence at Paris, which remained his home until he was released from his post in 1645. While departing from his last visit to Sweden, Grotius was shipwreck ed on his voyage. He washed up on the shore of Rostock, ill and weather-beaten, and on August 28, 1645 he died; his body at last returned to the country of its youth, being laid to rest in the Nieuwe Kerk in Delft. [ Personal life ] Grotius&apos; personal motto was Ruit hora ( &quot; Time is running away &quot; ); his last words were &quot; By understanding many things, I have accomplished nothing &quot; (Door veel te begrijpen, heb ik niets bereikt). { Bill Uzgalis, Hugo Grotius in Western Philosophers, Oregon State online notes (2003). } Significant friends and acquaintances of his included the theologian Franciscus Junius, the poet Daniel Heinsius, the philologist Gerhard Johann Vossius, the historian Johannes Meursius, the engineer Simon Stevin, the historian Jacques Auguste de Thou, and the Arabic scholar Erpinius. He was also friend with the Flemish Jesuit Andreas Schottus. { Guillaume H.M. Posthumus Meyjes (ed.), Hugo Grotius, Meletius sive De iis quae inter Christianos conveniunt Epistola: Critical Edition with Translation, Commentary and Introduction, Brill 1988, p. 33, n. 67 } [ Bibliography, selected works ] The Peace Palace Library in The Hague holds the Grotius Collection, which has a large number of books by and about Hugo Grotius. The collection was based on a donation from Martinus Nijhoff of 55 editions of De jure belli ac pacis libri tres. Works are listed in order of publication, with the exception of works published posthumously or after long delay (estimated composition dates are given). { See Catalogue of the Grotius Collection (Peace Palace Library, The Hague) and &apos;Grotius, Hugo&apos; in Dictionary of Seventeenth Century Dutch Philosophers (Thoemmes Press 2003). } Where an English translation is available, the most recently published translation is listed beneath the title. Adamus exul (The Exile of Adam; tragedy) - The Hague, 1601 De republica emendanda (To Improve the Dutch Republic; manuscript 1601) - pub. The Hague, 1984 Parallelon rerumpublicarum (Comparison of Constitutions; manuscript 1601-02) - pub. Haarlem 1801-03 De Indis (On the Indies; manuscript 1604-05) - pub. 1868 as De Jure Praedae Commentary on the Law of Prize and Booty, ed. Martine Julia van Ittersum (Liberty Fund, 2006). Christus patiens (The Passion of Christ; tragedy) - Leiden, 1608 Mare Liberum (The Free Seas; from chapter 12 of De Indis) - Leiden, 1609 The Free Sea, ed. David Armitage (Liberty Fund, 2004). De antiquitate reipublicae Batavicae (On the Antiquity of the Batavian Republic) - Leiden, 1610 The Antiquity of the Batavian Republic, ed. Jan Waszink and others (van Gorcum, 2000). Meletius (manuscript 1611) - pub. Leiden, 1988 Meletius, ed. G.H.M. Posthumus Meyjes (Brill, 1988). Annales et Historiae de rebus Belgicus (Annals and History of the Low Countries; manuscript 1612) - pub. Amsterdam, 1657 The Annals and History of the Low-Countrey-warrs, ed. Thomas Manley (London, 1665). Ordinum Hollandiae ac Westfrisiae pietas (The Piety of the States of Holland and Westfriesland) - Leiden, 1613 Ordinum Hollandiae ac Westfrisiae pietas, ed. Edwin Rabbie (Brill, 1995). De imperio summarum potestatum circa sacra (On the power of sovereigns concerning religious affairs; manuscript 1614-17) - pub. Paris, 1647 De imperio summarum potestatum circa sacra, ed. Harm-Jan van Dam (Brill, 2001). De satisfactione Christi adversus Faustum Socinum (On the satisfaction of Christ against [the doctrines of] Faustus Socinus ) - Leiden, 1617 Defensio fidei catholicae de satisfactione Christi, ed. Edwin Rabbie (van Gorcum, 1990). &apos;&apos;A defence of the Catholic faith concerning the satisfaction of Christ against Faustus Socinus&apos;&apos;, tr. Frank Hugh Foster (W. F. Draper, 1889). Inleydinge tot de Hollantsche rechtsgeleertheit (Introduction to Dutch Jurisprudence; written in Loevenstein) - pub. The Hague, 1631 The Jurisprudence of Holland, ed. R.W. Lee (Oxford, 1926). Bewijs van den waaren godsdienst (Proof of the True Religion; didactic poem) - Rotterdam, 1622 Apologeticus (Defense of the actions which led to his arrest) - Paris, 1922 De jure belli ac pacis (On the Law of War and Peace) - Paris, 1625 (2nd ed. Amsterdam 1631) The Rights of War and Peace, ed. Richard Tuck (Liberty Fund, 2005). De veritate religionis Christianae (On the Truth of the Christian religion) - Paris, 1627 The Truth of the Christian Religion, ed. John Clarke (Edinburgh, 1819). Sophompaneas (Joseph; tragedy) - Amsterdam, 1635 De origine gentium Americanarum dissertatio (Dissertation of the origin of the American peoples) - Paris 1642 Via ad pacem ecclesiasticam (The way to religious peace) - Paris, 1642 Annotationes in Vetus Testamentum (Commentaries on the Old Testament) - Amsterdam, 1644 Annotationes in Novum Testamentum (Commentaries on the New Testament) - Amsterdam and Paris, 1641–50 De fato (On Destiny) - Paris, 1648 [ See also ] [ Christianity Arminianism Poetry ] Coenraad van Beuningen English school of international relations theory (Grotian School) History of the Netherlands International waters Peace of Westphalia Pieter de Groot Synod of Dort [ Notes ] [ 30em ] [ References ] [ van Ittersum Martine Julia Hugo Grotius, Natural Rights Theories and the Rise of Dutch Power in the East Indies 1595-1615 Boston Brill 2006 90-04-14979-1 ] [ Vreeland Hamilton Hugo Grotius: The Father of the Modern Science of International Law New York Oxford University Press 1917 0-8377-2702-2 ] [ Further reading ] [ 10.1177/0090591785013002005 Haakonssen Knud 1985 Grotius and the History of Political Thought Political Theory 13 2 239–65 ] Borschberg, Peter, 2011, Hugo Grotius, the Portuguese and Free Trade in the East Indies, Singapore and Leiden: Singapore University Press and KITLV Press. Bull, Kingsbury and Roberts, eds., 1990. Hugo Grotius and International Relations. Oxford Univ. Press. William Lane Craig, 1985. The Historical Argument for the Resurrection of Christ During the Deist Controversy, Texts and Studies in Religion, Vol. 23. Lewiston NY &amp; Queenston, Ontario: Edwin Mellen Press. Avery Dulles, 1999. A History of Apologetics. Eugene, Oregon: Wipf &amp; Stock. Dumbauld, Edward, 1969. The Life and Legal Writings of Hugo Grotius. Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press. Edwards, Charles S., 1981. Hugo Grotius: The Miracle of Holland. Chicago: Nelson Hall. Grotiana. Assen, The Netherlands: Royal Van Gorcum Publishers. A journal of Grotius studies, 1980-. Haggenmacher, Peter, 1983. Grotius et la doctrine de la guerre juste. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France. Knight, W.S.M., 19255. The Life and Works of Hugo Grotius. London: Sweet &amp; Maxwell, Ltd. Lauterpacht, Hersch, 1946, &quot; The Grotian Tradition in International Law, &quot; in British Yearbook of International Law. Mühlegger, Florian. Hugo Grotius. Ein christlicher Humanist in politischer Verantwortung. Berlin and New York, de Gruyter, 2007, XIV, 546 S. (Arbeiten zur Kirchengeschichte, 103). Nellen, Henk J. M., 2007. Hugo de Groot: Een leven in strijd om de vrede (official Dutch State biography). The Hague: Balans Publishing. -------- and Rabbie, eds., 1994. Hugo Grotius, Theologian. New York: E.J. Brill. O&apos;Donovan, Oliver. 2004. &quot; The Justice of Assignment and Subjective Rights in Grotius, &quot; in Bonds of Imperfection: Christian Politics Past and Present. Salter, John. (2001) &quot; Hugo Grotius; Property and Consent. &quot; Political Theory 29, no. 4, 537-55. Stumpf, Christoph A., 2006. The Grotian Theology of International Law: Hugo Grotius and the Moral Fundament of International Relations. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter. Tuck, Richard, 1993. Philosophy and Government: 1572-1651. Cambridge Univ. Press. --------, 1999. The Rights of War and Peace: Political Thought and the International Order from Grotius to Kant. Oxford Univ. Press. Vollenhoven, Cornelius van, 1926. Grotius and Geneva, Bibliotheca Visseriana, Vol. VI. --------, 1919. Three Stages in the Evolution of International Law. The Hague: Nijhoff. [ External links ] [ Hugo Grotius ] [ Hugo Grotius ] [ lccn-n78-87113 ] Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry Extensive catalogue of Grotius&apos; writings at the Peace Palace Library, The Hague Syntagma arateorum, Leiden 1600 da www.atlascoelestis.com [ Texts online ] [ Hugo+Grotius Hugo Grotius ] Hugo Grotius, &apos;&apos;On the Laws of War and Peace&apos;&apos; (abridged) Hugo Grotius, &apos;&apos;On the Laws of War and Peace&apos;&apos; (unabridged), &apos;&apos;The Free Seas&apos;&apos;, and more. Hugo Grotius, &apos;&apos;On the Laws of War and Peace&apos;&apos; (Latin, first edition of 1625) via the French National Library (&apos;&apos;télécharger&apos;&apos; to download) Physicarum disputationum septima de infinito, loco et vacuo; disputation by Hugo Grotius, 14 years old, at Leiden University Logicarum disputationum quarta de postpraedicamentis; another disputation by Hugo Grotius, 14 years old, at Leiden University Preparing Mare Liberum for the Press by Martine Julia van Ittersum Puts into context of truce negotiations 1608-09. Ittersum (p.  18) notes Grotius&apos; citing of School of Salamanca figures, as well as the ancient Greek, Roman and early Church Fathers (p.  12). [ Grotius, Hugo Huig de Groot; Hugo de Groot philosopher 10 April 1583 Delft, Holland 28 August 1645 Rostock, Pomerania ] Category:1583 births Category:1645 deaths Category:17th-century Latin-language writers Category:17th-century philosophers Category:Christian apologists Category:Christian philosophers Category:Dutch Christians Category:Dutch diplomats Category:Dutch dramatists and playwrights Category:Dutch expatriates Category:Dutch Golden Age writers Category:Dutch historians Category:Dutch legal scholars Category:Dutch philosophers Category:Dutch poets Category:Dutch politicians Category:Dutch Renaissance humanists Category:Dutch theologians Category:Dutch escapees Category:Early modern philosophers Category:Erastians Category:International law scholars Category:Leiden University alumni Category:Remonstrants Category:People from Delft Category:Philosophers of law Category:Political philosophers Category:Political theorists Category:Protestant philosophers Category:Walhalla enshrinees az:Hüqo Qrotsi be:Гуга Гроцый bg:Хуго Гроций bs:Hugo Grotius ca:Hugo Grotius cs:Hugo Grotius cy:Hugo Grotius da:Hugo Grotius de:Hugo Grotius et:Hugo Grotius el:Ούγκο Γκρότιους es:Hugo Grocio eo:Hugo Grotius eu:Hugo Grotius fr:Hugo Grotius fy:Hugo de Groot ko:휘호 그로티우스 id:Hugo Grotius is:Hugo Grotius it:Ugo Grozio kk:Гроций Гуго la:Hugo Grotius lv:Hugo Grocijs lb:Hugo Grotius lt:Hugo Grotius hu:Hugo Grotius mt:Ugo Grozju arz:هوجو جروشيوس nl:Hugo de Groot (rechtsgeleerde) ja:フーゴー・グローティウス no:Hugo Grotius nn:Hugo Grotius pl:Hugo Grocjusz pt:Hugo Grócio ro:Hugo Grotius ru:Гроций, Гуго sk:Hugo Grotius sl:Hugo Grotius sr:Hugo Grocije fi:Hugo Grotius sv:Hugo Grotius tr:Hugo Grotius uk:Гуґо Ґроцій war:Hugo Grotius yo:Hugo Grotius zh:胡果·格老秀斯