[ the usage in virology temperateness (virology) ] [ December 2009 ] [ Middle latitudes Talk:Temperateness#Middle Latitudes Merger July 2009 ] [ World map with temperate zones highlighted in green ] In geography, temperate or tepid latitude s of the globe lie between the tropics and the polar region s. The changes in these regions between summer and winter are generally relatively moderate, rather than extreme hot or cold. However, in certain areas, such as Asia and central North America, the variations between summer and winter can be extreme because these areas are far away from the sea, causing them to have a continental climate. In regions traditionally considered tropical, localities at high altitude s (e.g. parts of the Andes ) may have a temperate climate. The north temperate zone extends from the Tropic of Cancer (at about 23.5 degrees north latitude) to the Arctic Circle (at approximately 66.5 degrees north latitude). The south temperate zone extends from the Tropic of Capricorn (at approximately 23.5 degrees south latitude) to the Antarctic Circle (at approximately 66.5 degrees south latitude). In a very broad sense, temperate climate also includes a subtropical climate, variants: subtropical semidesert/desert, humid subtropical, oceanic subtropical and Mediterranean climate. However, a typical temperate climate is one of the four climate zones in the world, beside polar region s ( subarctic climate, arctic climate, tundra climate, ice cap climate ) and the subtropics, tropics. The maritime climate is affected by the ocean s, which help to sustain somewhat stable temperatures throughout the year. In temperate zones the prevailing winds are from the west, thus the western edge of temperate continents most commonly experience this maritime climate. Such regions include Western Europe, and western North America at latitudes between 40° and 60° north (65°N in Europe). Continental, semi-arid and arid climates are usually situated inland, with warmer summers and colder winters. Heat loss and reception are aided by extensive land mass. In North America, the Rocky Mountains act as a climate barrier to the maritime air blowing from the west, creating a semi-arid and continental climate to the east. In Europe, the maritime climate is able to stabilize inland temperature, because the major mountain range  – the Alps  – is oriented east-west (the area east of the long Scandinavian mountain range is an exception). The vast majority of the world&apos;s human population resides in temperate zones, especially in the northern hemisphere because of the mass of land. For the history of the term, see geographical zone [ See also ] Geographical zone Mid-latitudes and Middle latitudes Habitat (ecology) Polar circle Subtropics Category:Climate ang:Midwearme geardas ar:مناخ معتدل be-x-old:Умераны клімат bg:Умерен климатичен пояс bs:Umjereni pojas ca:Clima temperat cs:Mírný podnebný pás da:Tempereret klima de:Gemäßigte Zone et:Parasvööde el:Εύκρατη ζώνη es:Clima templado eo:Modera klimato eu:Klima epel fr:Climat tempéré gl:Clima temperado ko:온대 hr:Umjereni pojas id:Iklim sedang is:Temprað belti it:Clima temperato he:אקלים ממוזג ka:ზომიერი სარტყლები kk:Қоңыржай белдеу la:Zona temperata lv:Mērenā josla lt:Vidutinių platumų klimatas hu:Mérsékelt öv mk:Умерена клима ms:Iklim sederhana my:သမပိုင်းဇုန် nl:Gematigd klimaat ja:温帯 no:Temperert klima nn:Temperert klima pl:Klimat umiarkowany pt:Clima temperado ro:Zona temperată ru:Умеренный климат simple:Temperate zone fi:Lauhkea vyöhyke sv:Tempererat klimat ta:மிதவெப்பமண்டலம் tr:Ilıman kuşak iklimleri uk:Помірний пояс vi:Ôn đới wa:Mitan froed payis zh:温带