[ &quot; Atlantic &quot;, &quot; North Atlantic &quot;, &quot; South Atlantic &quot;, &quot; Atlantic Basin &quot; and &quot; Atlantic coast &quot; redirect here. For other uses, see Atlantic (disambiguation), North Atlantic (disambiguation), South Atlantic (disambiguation), Atlantic Basin (disambiguation), and Atlantic Coast (disambiguation). ] { Arctic and } { Antarctic regions } { Expedition 29 on board the } { ISS. The pass starts from just north-east of the Island of } { Newfoundland over the North Atlantic Ocean to central Africa, over South Sudan. } The Atlantic Ocean is the second-largest of the world&apos;s ocean ic divisions. With a total area of about [ 106,400,000 km2 sqmi ], { &quot; The New Encyclopaedia Britannica &quot;, Volume 2, Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1974. p.294 } it covers approximately 20% of the Earth &apos;s surface and about 26% of its water surface area. The first part of its name refers to Atlas of Greek mythology, making the Atlantic the &quot; Sea of Atlas &quot;. The oldest known mention of &quot; Atlantic &quot; is in The Histories of Herodotus around 450 BC (Hdt. 1.202.4): Atlantis thalassa (Greek: Ἀτλαντὶς θάλασσα; English: Sea of Atlas); see also: Atlas Mountains. The term Ethiopic Ocean, derived from Ethiopia, was applied to the southern Atlantic ocean as late as the mid-19th century. [ George Ripley Charles Anderson Dana The American cyclopaedia: a popular dictionary of general knowledge http://books.google.com/books?id%3DROQXAQAAIAAJ%26amp%3Bpg%3DPA69 15 April 2011 1873 Appleton 69– ] Before Europeans discovered other oceans, the term &quot; ocean &quot; itself was synonymous with the waters beyond the Strait of Gibraltar that we now know as the Atlantic. The early Greeks believed this ocean to be a gigantic river encircling the world. The Atlantic Ocean occupies an elongated, S-shaped basin extending longitudinally between Europe and Africa to the east, and the Americas to the west. As one component of the interconnected global ocean, it is connected in the north to the Arctic Ocean (which is sometimes considered a sea of the Atlantic), to the Pacific Ocean in the southwest, the Indian Ocean in the southeast, and the Southern Ocean in the south. (Other definitions describe the Atlantic as extending southward to Antarctica.) The equator subdivides it into the North Atlantic Ocean and South Atlantic Ocean. [ Geography ] { Portugal } { alt=Photo of surf breaking on rocky shore } The Atlantic Ocean is bounded on the west by North and South America. It connects to the Arctic Ocean through the Denmark Strait, Greenland Sea, Norwegian Sea and Barents Sea. To the east, the boundaries of the ocean proper are Europe; the Strait of Gibraltar (where it connects with the Mediterranean Sea –one of its marginal sea s – and, in turn, the Black Sea ) and Africa. In the southeast, the Atlantic merges into the Indian Ocean. The 20° East meridian, running south from Cape Agulhas to Antarctica defines its border. Some authorities show it extending south to Antarctica, while others show it bounded at the 60° parallel by the Southern Ocean. { &apos;&apos;Limits of Oceans and Seas&apos;&apos;. International Hydrographic Organization Special Publication No. 23, 1953. } In the southwest, the Drake Passage connects it to the Pacific Ocean. The man-made Panama Canal links the Atlantic and Pacific. Besides those mentioned, other large bodies of water adjacent to the Atlantic are the Caribbean Sea; the Gulf of Mexico; Hudson Bay; the Arctic Ocean; the Mediterranean Sea; the North Sea; the Baltic Sea and the Celtic Sea. Covering approximately 22% of Earth&apos;s surface, the Atlantic is second in size to the Pacific. With its adjacent seas, it occupies an area of about [ 106400000 km2 sqmi ]; without them, it has an area of [ 82400000 km2 sqmi ]. The land that drains into the Atlantic covers four times that of either the Pacific or Indian oceans. The volume of the Atlantic with its adjacent seas is 354,700,000  cubic kilometers (85,100,000   cu mi ) and without them 323,600,000  cubic kilometres (77,640,000  cu mi). The average depth of the Atlantic, with its adjacent seas, is [ 3339 m fathom ft out ]; without them it is [ 3926 m fathom ft ]. The greatest depth, Milwaukee Deep with [ 8380 m fathom ft ], is in the Puerto Rico Trench. The Atlantic&apos;s width varies from [ 1538 nmi km mi in ] between Brazil and Sierra Leone to over [ 3450 nmi km mi -2 ] in the south. [ April 2011 ] [ Cultural significance ] [ October 2010 ] Transatlantic travel played a major role in the expansion of Western civilization into the Americas. It is the Atlantic that separates the &quot; Old World &quot; from the &quot; New World &quot;. In modern times, some idiom s refer to the ocean in a humorously diminutive way as the Pond, describing both the geographical and cultural divide between North America and Europe, in particular between the English-speaking nations of both continents. Many British people refer to the United States and Canada as &quot; across the pond &quot;, and vice versa. { Example: BBC Click – Episode 04 April 2009 } [ Ocean bottom ] { bathymetry } { Map that uses color to show ocean depth } The principal feature of the bathymetry (bottom topography ) is a submarine mountain range called the Mid-Atlantic Ridge. { Kenneth Hsu (1992) Challenger at Sea, Princeton, Princeton University Press, ISBN 0-691-08735-0 p. 57 } It extends from Iceland in the north to approximately 58° South latitude, reaching a maximum width of about [ 860 nmi km mi -1 ]. A great rift valley also extends along the ridge over most of its length. The depth of water at the apex of the ridge is less than [ 2700 m fathom ft ] in most places, while the bottom of the ridge is three times as deep. Several peaks rise above the water and form islands. { Kenneth Hsu The Mediterranean Was a Desert, ISBN 0-691-02406-5 illustration 13. } The South Atlantic Ocean has an additional submarine ridge, the Walvis Ridge. { National Geographic Atlas of the World: Revised Sixth Edition, National Geographic Society, 1992 } The Mid-Atlantic Ridge separates the Atlantic Ocean into two large troughs with depths from [ 3700 - 5500 m fathom ft ]. Transverse ridges running between the continents and the Mid-Atlantic Ridge divide the ocean floor into numerous basins. Some of the larger basins are the Blake, Guiana, North American, Cape Verde, and Canaries basins in the North Atlantic. The largest South Atlantic basins are the Angola, Cape, Argentina, and Brazil basins. The deep ocean floor is thought to be fairly flat with occasional deeps, abyssal plains, trenches, seamount s, basins, plateaus, canyons, and some guyot s. Various shelves along the margins of the continents constitute about 11% of the bottom topography with few deep channels cut across the continental rise. Ocean floor trenches and seamounts: [ 8605 m fathom ft ] [ 8428 m fathom ft ] [ 7454 m fathom ft ] Puerto Rico Trench, in the North Atlantic, is the deepest trench at Milwaukee Deep. sea-seek.com Laurentian Abyss is found off the eastern coast of Canada South Sandwich Trench reaches a depth of Romanche Trench is located near the equator and reaches a depth of about. Ocean sediment s are composed of: [ 60 - 3300 m fathom ft ] Terrigenous deposits with land origins, consisting of sand, mud, and rock particles formed by erosion, weathering, and volcanic activity on land washed to sea. These materials are found mostly on the continental shelves and are thickest near large river mouths or off desert coasts. Pelagic deposits, which contain the remains of organisms that sink to the ocean floor, include red clays and Globigerina, pteropod, and siliceous oozes. Covering most of the ocean floor and ranging in thickness from they are thickest in the convergence belts, notably at the Hamilton Ridge and in upwelling zones. Authigenic deposits consist of such materials as manganese nodule s. They occur where sedimentation proceeds slowly or where currents sort the deposits, such as in the Hewett Curve. [ Water characteristics ] { thermohaline circulation. Purple paths represent deep-water currents, while blue paths represent surface currents. } { thumb } { alt=Map displaying a looping line with arrows indicating that water flows eastward in the far Southern ocean, angling north east of Australia, turning sough after passing Alaska, then crossing the mid-Pacific to flow north of Australia, continuing west below Africa, then turning northwest until reaching eastern Canada, then angling east to southern Europe, then finally turning south just below Greenland and flowing down the Americas&apos; eastern coast, and resuming its flow eastward to complete the circle } alt=Map showing 5 circles. The first is between western Australia and eastern Africa. The second is between eastern Australia and western South America. The third is between Japan and western North America. Of the two in the Atlantic, one is in hemisphere. On average, the Atlantic is the saltiest major ocean; surface water salinity in the open ocean ranges from 33 to 37 parts per thousand (3.3 – 3.7%) by mass and varies with latitude and season. Evaporation, precipitation, river inflow and sea ice melting influence surface salinity values. Although the lowest salinity values are just north of the equator (because of heavy tropical rainfall), in general the lowest values are in the high latitudes and along coasts where large rivers enter. Maximum salinity values occur at about 25° north and south, in subtropical regions with low rainfall and high evaporation. Surface water temperatures, which vary with latitude, current systems, and season and reflect the latitudinal distribution of solar energy, range from below [ −2 C F ]. Maximum temperatures occur north of the equator, and minimum values are found in the polar regions. In the middle latitudes, the area of maximum temperature variations, values may vary by 7–8 °C (12–15 °F). The Atlantic Ocean consists of four major water masses. The North and South Atlantic central waters make up the surface. The sub-Antarctic intermediate water extends to depths of [ 1000 m fathom ft ]. The North Atlantic Deep Water reaches depths of as much as [ 4000 m fathom ft ]. The Antarctic Bottom Water occupies ocean basins at depths greater than 4,000 metres. Within the North Atlantic, ocean currents isolate the Sargasso Sea, a large elongated body of water, with above average salinity. The Sargasso Sea contains large amounts of seaweed and is also the spawning ground for both the European eel and the American eel. The Coriolis effect circulates North Atlantic water in a clockwise direction, whereas South Atlantic water circulates counter-clockwise. The south tide s in the Atlantic Ocean are semi-diurnal; that is, two high tides occur during each 24 lunar hours. In latitudes above 40° North some east-west oscillation occurs. [ Climate ] { trade wind s in the Atlantic Ocean—areas of converging winds that move along the same track as the prevailing wind—create instabilities in the atmosphere that may lead to the formation of hurricanes. } { alt=Map of Caribbean showing seven approximately parallel westward-pointing arrows that extend from east of the Virgin Islands to Cuba. The southern arrows bend northward just east of the Dominican Republic before straightening out again. } Climate is influenced by the temperatures of the surface waters and water currents as well as winds. Because of the ocean&apos;s great capacity to store and release heat, maritime climates are more moderate and have less extreme seasonal variations than inland climates. Precipitation can be approximated from coastal weather data and air temperature from water temperatures. The oceans are the major source of the atmospheric moisture that is obtained through evaporation. Climatic zones vary with latitude; the warmest zones stretch across the Atlantic north of the equator. The coldest zones are in high latitudes, with the coldest regions corresponding to the areas covered by sea ice. Ocean currents influence climate by transporting warm and cold waters to other regions. The winds that are cooled or warmed when blowing over these currents influence adjacent land areas. The Gulf Stream and its northern extension towards Europe, the North Atlantic Drift, for example, warms the atmosphere of the British Isles and north-western Europe and influences weather and climate as far south as the northern Mediterranean. The cold water currents contribute to heavy fog off the coast of eastern Canada (the Grand Banks of Newfoundland area) and Africa&apos;s north-western coast. In general, winds transport moisture and air over land areas. Hurricanes develop in the southern part of the North Atlantic Ocean. More local particular weather examples could be found in examples such as the; Azores High, Benguela Current, Nor&apos;easter. [ History ] { Pangaea, which formed the Atlantic Ocean known today } { alt=Animation showing the continents separating from a single mass, making creating the Atlantic in the process } The Atlantic Ocean appears to be the second youngest of the five oceans. It did not exist prior to 130 million years ago, when the continents that formed from the breakup of the ancestral super continent Pangaea were drifting apart from seafloor spreading. The Atlantic has been extensively explored since the earliest settlements along its shores. The Viking s, the Portuguese, and the Spaniards were the most famous among early explorers. After Columbus, European exploration rapidly accelerated, and many new trade routes were established. As a result, the Atlantic became and remains the major artery between Europe and the Americas (known as transatlantic trade). Scientific explorations include the Challenger expedition, the German Meteor expedition, Columbia University &apos;s Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory and the United States Navy Hydrographic Office. [ Notable crossings ] { Ra II, a ship built from } { papyrus, was successfully sailed across the Atlantic by } { Thor Heyerdahl proving that it was possible to cross the Atlantic from Africa using such boats in early epochs of history. } [ 3000 mi km ] Around 980 – 982, Eric the Red discovered Greenland, geographically and geologically a part of the Americas. In 985 or 986, Bjarni Herjólfsson was the first European to sight the Americas. He did not go ashore, though. In the year 1000, the Icelander Leif Ericson was the first European to set foot on North American soil, corresponding to today&apos;s Eastern coast of Canada, i. e. the province of Newfoundland and Labrador, including the area of land named &quot; Vinland &quot; by Ericson. The Norse discovery was documented in the 13th century Icelandic Sagas and was corroborated by recent L&apos;Anse aux Meadows archeological evidence. Around 1010, Thorfinnr Karlsefni led an attempted Viking settlement in North America with 160 settlers, but was later driven off by the natives. His son Snorri Thorfinnsson was the first American born (somewhere between 1010 and 1013) to European (Icelandic) immigrant parents. In 1419 and 1427, Portuguese navigators reached Madeira and Azores, respectively. From 1415 to 1488, Portuguese navigators sailed along the Western African coast, reaching the Cape of Good Hope. In 1492, Christopher Columbus landed on the island of San Salvador in The Bahamas. In 1497, John Cabot landed at Bonavista Newfoundland and Labrador. In 1500, Pedro Álvares Cabral reached Brazil. In 1524, Italian explorer Giovanni da Verrazzano discovered the United States of America &apos;s east coast. In 1534, Jacques Cartier entered the Gulf of St. Lawrence and reached the mouth of the St. Lawrence River. In 1583, Sir Humphrey Gilbert claimed Newfoundland for the English Crown. In 1764 William Harrison (the son of John Harrison ) sailed aboard the HMS Tartar, with the H-4 time piece. The voyage became the basis for the invention of the global system of Longitude. In 1858, Cyrus West Field laid the first transatlantic telegraph cable (it quickly failed). In 1865 Brunel &apos;s ship the SS &apos;&apos;Great Eastern&apos;&apos; laid the first successful transatlantic telegraph cable. In 1870 the small City of Ragusa ( Dubrovnik ) became the first small Lifeboat to cross the Atlantic from Cork to Boston with two men crew, John Charles Buckley and Nikola Primorac (di Costa), only. A Speck on the Sea: Epic Voyages in the Most Improbable Vessels, page 57, William H. Longyard, McGraw-Hill Professional, 2003. ISBN 978-0-07-141306-0 In 1896 Frank Samuelsen and George Harbo from Norway became the first people to ever row across the Atlantic Ocean. On April 15, 1912 the RMS Titanic sank after hitting an iceberg with a loss of more than 1,500 lives. Jill Lawless Last Titanic survivor sells mementos. Associated Press. October 16, 2008 1914–1918, the First Battle of the Atlantic took place. In 1919, the American NC-4 became the first seaplane to cross the Atlantic (though it made a couple of landings on islands and the sea along the way, and taxied several hundred miles). Later in 1919, a British aeroplane piloted by Alcock and Brown made the first non-stop transatlantic flight, from Newfoundland to Ireland. In 1921, the British were the first to cross the North Atlantic in an airship. In 1922, Sacadura Cabral and Gago Coutinho were the first to cross the South Atlantic in an airship. In 1927, Charles Lindbergh made the first solo non-stop transatlantic flight in an aircraft (between New York City and Paris ). In 1931, Bert Hinkler made the first solo non-stop transatlantic flight across the South Atlantic in an aircraft. In 1932, Amelia Earhart became the first female to make a solo flight across the Atlantic 1939–1945, the Second Battle of the Atlantic. Nearly 3,700 Allied ships were sunk at a cost of 783 German U-boat s. &quot; Introduction &quot; U-Boat Operations of the Second World War—Vol 1 by Wynn, Kenneth, 1998 p. 1 In 1952, Ann Davison was the first woman to single-handedly sail the Atlantic Ocean. In 1965, Robert Manry crossed the Atlantic from the U.S. to England non-stop in a 13.5 foot (4.05 meters) sailboat named &quot; Tinkerbell &quot;. Tinkerbelle (1967; Harper &amp; Row, New York City, N.Y.) Several others also crossed the Atlantic in very small sailboats in the 1960s, none of them non-stop, though. In 1969 and 1970 Thor Heyerdahl launched expeditions to cross the Atlantic in boats built from papyrus. He succeeded in crossing the Atlantic from Morocco to Barbados after a two-month voyage of 6,100  km with Ra II in 1970, thus conclusively proving that boats such as the Ra could have sailed with the Canary Current across the Atlantic in prehistoric times. Ryne, Linn. Voyages into History. Retrieved 2008-01-13. In 1975, Fons Oerlemans crossed the Atlantic in 82 days, starting from Safi (Morocco) to Trinidad and Tobago, on a selfmade raft. In 1980, Gérard d&apos;Aboville was the first man to cross the Atlantic Ocean rowing. In 1984, Five Argentines sail in a 10-meter-long raft made from tree trunks named Atlantis from Canary Islands and after 52 days journey arrived to Venezuela in an attempt to prove travelers from Africa may have crossed the Atlantic before Christopher Columbus. 5 cross Atlantic in tiny raft. News.google.com. 12 July 1984 Retrieved on 2011-10-27. Expedicion Atlantis In 1994, Guy Delage was the first man to allegedly swim across the Atlantic Ocean (with the help of a kick board, from Cape Verde to Barbados ). In 1998, Benoît Lecomte was the first man to swim across the northern Atlantic Ocean without a kick board, stopping for only one week in the Azores. In 1999, after rowing for 81 days and 4,767 kilometres (2,962  mi), Tori Murden became the first woman to cross the Atlantic Ocean by rowboat alone when she reached Guadeloupe from the Canary Islands. [ Ethiopic Ocean ] The Aethiopian Sea, Ethiopic Ocean or Ethiopian Ocean (Okeanos Aithiopos), is an old name for what is now called the South Atlantic Ocean, which is separated from the North Atlantic Ocean by a narrow region between Natal, Brazil and Monrovia, Liberia. The use of this term illustrates a past trend towards referring to the whole continent of Africa by the name Aethiopia. The modern nation of Ethiopia, in northeast Africa, is nowhere near the Ethiopic Ocean, which would be said to lie off the west coast of Africa. The term Ethiopian Ocean sometimes appeared until the mid-19th century. [ October 2009 ] [ Economy ] The Atlantic has contributed significantly to the development and economy of surrounding countries. Besides major transatlantic transportation and communication routes, the Atlantic offers abundant petroleum deposits in the sedimentary rock s of the continental shelves. The Atlantic hosts the world&apos;s richest fishing resources, especially in the waters covering the shelves. The major fish are cod, haddock, hake, herring, and mackerel. The most productive areas include Newfoundland &apos;s Grand Banks, the Nova Scotia shelf, Georges Bank off Cape Cod, the Bahama Banks, the waters around Iceland, the Irish Sea, the Dogger Bank of the North Sea, and the Falkland Banks. Eel, lobster, and whale s appear in great quantities. Various international treaties attempt to reduce pollution caused by environmental threats such as oil spills, marine debris, and the incineration of toxic wastes at sea. [ Terrain ] From October to June the surface is usually covered with sea ice in the Labrador Sea, Denmark Strait, and Baltic Sea. A clockwise warm-water gyre occupies the northern Atlantic, and a counter-clockwise warm-water gyre appears in the southern Atlantic. The Mid-Atlantic Ridge, a rugged north-south centerline for the entire Atlantic basin, first discovered by the Challenger Expedition dominates the ocean floor. This was formed by the vulcanism that also formed the ocean floor and the islands rising from it. The Atlantic has irregular coasts indented by numerous bays, gulfs, and seas. These include the Norwegian Sea, Baltic Sea, North Sea, Labrador Sea, Black Sea, Gulf of Saint Lawrence, Bay of Fundy, Gulf of Maine, Mediterranean Sea, Gulf of Mexico, and Caribbean Sea. Islands include Newfoundland (including hundreds of surrounding islands), Greenland, Iceland, Faroe Islands, Great Britain (including numerous surrounding islands), Ireland, Rockall, Sable Island, Azores, St. Pierre and Miquelon, Madeira, Bermuda, Canary Islands, Caribbean, Cape Verde, São Tomé and Príncipe, Annobón Province, Fernando de Noronha, Rocas Atoll, Ascension Island, Saint Helena, Trindade and Martim Vaz, Tristan da Cunha, Gough Island (Also known as Diego Alvarez), Falkland Islands, Tierra del Fuego, South Georgia Island, South Sandwich Islands, and Bouvet Island. [ Natural resources ] The Atlantic harbors petroleum and gas fields, fish, marine mammal s ( seals and whales), sand and gravel aggregates, placer deposit s, polymetallic nodules, and precious stones. [ Natural hazards ] alt=Overhead photo of iceberg Iceberg s are common from February to August in the Davis Strait, Denmark Strait, and the northwestern Atlantic and have been spotted as far south as Bermuda and Madeira. Ships are subject to superstructure icing in the extreme north from October to May. Persistent fog can be a maritime hazard from May to September, as can hurricanes north of the equator (May to December). The United States&apos; southeast coast has a long history of shipwrecks due to its many shoals and reefs. The Virginia and North Carolina coasts were particularly dangerous. The Bermuda Triangle is popularly believed to be the site of numerous aviation and shipping incidents because of unexplained and supposedly mysterious causes, but Coast Guard records do not support this belief. Hurricanes are also a natural hazard in the Atlantic, but mainly in the northern part of the ocean, rarely tropical cyclones form in the southern parts. Hurricanes usually form between June 1 and November 30 of every year. The most notable hurricane in the Atlantic would be Hurricane Katrina in the 2005 season. [ Current environmental issues ] Endangered marine species include the manatee, seals, sea lion s, turtle s, and whale s. Drift net fishing can kill dolphin s, albatross es and other seabirds ( petrel s, auk s ), hastening the fish stock decline and contributing to international disputes. { Problems and Prospects for the Pelagic Driftnet. animallaw.info. Retrieved on 2011-10-27. } Municipal pollution comes from the eastern United States, southern Brazil, and eastern Argentina; oil pollution in the Caribbean Sea, Gulf of Mexico, Lake Maracaibo, Mediterranean Sea, and North Sea; and industrial waste and municipal sewage pollution in the Baltic Sea, North Sea, and Mediterranean Sea. In 2005, there was some concern that warm northern European currents were slowing down, but no scientific consensus formed from that evidence. { Atlantic Ocean&apos;s &apos;Heat Engine&apos; Chills Down by Christopher Joyce. All Things Considered, National Public Radio, 30 Nov, 2005. } On June 7, 2006, Florida&apos;s wildlife commission voted to take the manatee off the state&apos;s endangered species list. Some environmentalists worry that this could erode safeguards for the popular sea creature. [ Marine pollution ] [ Marine pollution ] [ Ship pollution ] Marine pollution is a generic term for the entry into the ocean of potentially hazardous chemicals or particles. The biggest culprits are rivers and with them many agriculture fertilizer chemicals as well as livestock and human waste. The excess of oxygen-depleting chemicals leads to hypoxia and the creation of a dead zone. { Sebastian A. Gerlach &quot; Marine Pollution &quot;, Springer, Berlin (1975) } Marine debris, which is also known as marine litter, describes human-created waste floating in a body of water. Oceanic debris tends to accumulate at the center of gyres and coastlines, frequently washing aground where it is known as beach litter. [ Bordering countries and territories ] The states (territories in italics) with a coastline on the Atlantic Ocean (excluding the Baltic and Mediterranean Seas) are: [ Europe ] [ 5 ] [ Africa ] [ 5 ] ( claimed by Morocco ) ( Canary Islands ) [ South America ] [ 5 ] ( French Guiana ) [ Caribbean ] [ 5 ] ( Martinique and Guadeloupe ) ( Caribbean Netherlands ) [ Central and North America ] [ 5 ] [ Major ports and harbours ] [ List of ports and harbours of the Atlantic Ocean ] [ See also ] [ Environment Ecology Geography Weather ] Atlantic slave trade { Transatlantic flight } { Atlantic U-boat Campaign (World War I) } { Battle of the Atlantic (1939–1945) } { Borders of the oceans#Atlantic Ocean } { Gulf Stream shutdown } { History of the Atlantic Ocean articles } { Shipwrecks in the Atlantic Ocean } { Atlantic hurricanes } [ References ] [ 35em ] [ November 2010 ] [ Bibliography ] Simon Winchester. Atlantic: A Vast Ocean of a Million Stories. HarperCollins, 2010. ISBN 978-0-00-734137-5 [Alternative title: Atlantic: The Biography of an Ocean] Much of this article originated from the public domain site http://oceanographer.navy.mil/atlantic.html ( dead link ) [ External links ] [ Atlantic Ocean Atlantic Ocean no no no CIA World Fact Book, 2004/Atlantic Ocean no ] [ zh Atlantic Ocean ] [ Science/Environment/Water_Resources/Oceans Oceans ] LA Times special Altered Oceans Oceanography Image of the Day, from the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration NOAA In-situ Ocean Data Viewer Plot and download ocean observations www.cartage.org.lb www.mnsu.edu [ 0 N 30 W type:waterbody_scale:100000000 title ] Category:Atlantic Ocean Category:History of the Atlantic Ocean [ ur ] [ ml ] kbd:Атлантикэ Океан af:Atlantiese Oseaan als:Atlantik am:አትላንቲክ ውቅያኖስ ar:المحيط الأطلسي an:Ocián Atlantico arc:ܐܘܩܝܢܘܣ ܐܛܠܢܛܝܐ frp:Ocèan Atlantico as:আটলান্টিক মহাসাগৰ ast:Océanu Atlánticu gn:Paraguasu Atlántiko az:Atlantik okeanı bm:Atlantik Kogoji bn:আটলান্টিক মহাসাগর bjn:Lautan Atlantik zh-min-nan:Tāi-se-iûⁿ be:Атлантычны акіян be-x-old:Атлянтычны акіян bcl:Kadagatan Atlantiko bg:Атлантически океан bar:Atlantischa Ozean bo:ནུབ་རྒྱ་མཚོ་ཆེན་པོ། bs:Atlantski okean br:Meurvor Atlantel ca:Oceà Atlàntic cv:Атлантика океанĕ ceb:Kadagatang Atlantiko cs:Atlantský oceán sn:Gungwa reAtlantic cy:Cefnfor yr Iwerydd da:Atlanterhavet de:Atlantischer Ozean dsb:Atlantiski ocean et:Atlandi ookean el:Ατλαντικός Ωκεανός es:Océano Atlántico eo:Atlantika Oceano ext:Oceanu Alánticu eu:Ozeano Atlantikoa fa:اقیانوس اطلس hif:Atlantic Ocean fo:Atlantshav fr:Océan Atlantique fy:Atlantyske Oseaan fur:Ocean Atlantic ga:An tAigéan Atlantach gv:Yn Keayn Sheear gd:Cuan Siar gl:Océano Atlántico gan:大西洋 ko:대서양 haw:Moana ʻAkelanika hy:Ատլանտյան օվկիանոս hi:अन्ध महासागर hsb:Atlantiski ocean hr:Atlantski ocean io:Oceano Atlantiko ig:Òrìmìlì Atlantic ilo:Taaw Atlantiko id:Samudra Atlantik ia:Oceano Atlantic ie:Atlántic Ocean os:Атлантикон фурд is:Atlantshaf it:Oceano Atlantico he:האוקיינוס האטלנטי jv:Samudra Atlantika kn:ಅಟ್ಲಾಂಟಿಕ್ ಮಹಾಸಾಗರ pam:Atlantic Kadayatmalatan ka:ატლანტის ოკეანე kk:Атлант мұхиты kw:Keynvor Iwerydh sw:Atlantiki ht:Atlantik ku:Okyanûsa Atlantîk lad:Oseano Atlantiko la:Oceanus Atlanticus lv:Atlantijas okeāns lb:Atlanteschen Ozean lt:Atlanto vandenynas lij:Oçeano Atlantico li:Atlantische Oceaan ln:Atlantíki jbo:atlantik. zei braxamsi lmo:Ucean Atlantich hu:Atlanti-óceán mk:Атлантски Океан mg:Ranomasimbe Atlantika ml:അറ്റ്‌ലാന്റിക് മഹാസമുദ്രം mt:Oċean Atlantiku mr:अटलांटिक महासागर xmf:ატლანტიშ ოკიანე arz:المحيط الاطلنطى mzn:اطلس اوقیانوس ms:Lautan Atlantik mwl:Ouceano Atlántico mn:Атлантын далай my:အတ္တလန္တိတ်သမုဒ္ဒရာ nah:Ilhuicaātl Atlántico nl:Atlantische Oceaan nds-nl:Atlantische Ozeoan ne:एटलान्टिक महासागर new:एट्लान्टिक महासागर ja:大西洋 nap:Oceano Atlanteco frr:Atlantische Oseåån pih:Etlantic Oshen no:Atlanterhavet nn:Atlanterhavet oc:Ocean Atlantic mhr:Атлантик тептеҥыз om:Garba Atilaantiik uz:Atlantika okeani pag:Dayat Atlantic pnb:بحر اوقیانوس pap:Oceano Atlantiko ps:اتلانتيک سمندر koi:Атлантика океан km:មហាសមុទ្រអាត្លង់ទិក pms:Océan Atlàntich tpi:Solwara Atlantik nds:Atlantik pl:Ocean Atlantycki pt:Oceano Atlântico kaa:Atlantika okeanı crh:Atlantik okean ro:Oceanul Atlantic qu:Atlantiku mama qucha rue:Атлантічный океан ru:Атлантический океан sah:Атлантик океан se:Atlánta sco:Atlantic Ocean stq:Atlantiske Ozean nso:Atlantic Ocean sq:Oqeani Atlantik scn:Ocèanu Atlànticu simple:Atlantic Ocean sk:Atlantický oceán sl:Atlantski ocean szl:Atlantycki Uocean so:Badweynta Atlaantik ckb:ئوقیانووسی ئاتلانتیک sr:Атлантски океан sh:Atlantik fi:Atlantin valtameri sv:Atlanten tl:Karagatang Atlantiko ta:அத்திலாந்திக்குப் பெருங்கடல் roa-tara:Oceane Atlàndeche tt:Атлантик океан te:అట్లాంటిక్ మహాసముద్రం th:มหาสมุทรแอตแลนติก tg:Уқёнуси Атлантик tr:Atlas Okyanusu tk:Atlantik okean uk:Атлантичний океан ur:بحر اوقیانوس vep:Atlantine valdmeri vec:Osèano Atlàntego vi:Đại Tây Dương fiu-vro:Atlandi suurmeri wa:Oceyan atlantike war:Kalawdan Atlantico wo:Mbàmbulaanug Atlas wuu:大西洋 yi:אטלאנטישער אקעאן yo:Òkun Atlántíkì zh-yue:大西洋 diq:Okyanuso Atlantik zea:Atlantischen Oceaon bat-smg:Atlanta ondenīns zh:大西洋