[ the lowered seventh degree subtonic ] Seventh scale degree, or leading-tone, leading to the first scale degree, or tonic, in C major EQ leading-tone.mid Play EQ Just leading-tone.mid Play Just. Tonic and leading tone chords in C Leading tone and tonic in C.mid Play. C major and B diminished (b dimdeg ) chords. Diminished triad on B just.mid Play just leading tone chord Dominant seventh and incomplete dominant seventh in C major: G7 and b dimdeg chords Incomplete dominant seventh chord in C major.mid Play. { Tritone resolution inward and outwards } [ Tritone resolution inward.ogg Play inward ] [ Tritone resolution outwards.mid Play outwards ] {. Both notes resolve by half step. } { Tritone substitution, ii-subV-I on C, creates an upper leading-note (D } [ flat ] {, which leads down to C) } [ Tritone substitution ii-subV-I.ogg play ] In music theory, a leading-note (also subsemitone, and called the leading-tone in the US) is a note or pitch which resolves or &quot; leads &quot; to a note one semitone higher or lower, being a lower and upper leading-tone, respectively. [ Leading tone in V-I.ogg Leading tone in V-I progression Leading tone repeats four times over dominant (V) chord which then moves to the tonic (I) as the leading tone resolves upwards to the tonic ogg ] Generally, the leading tone is the seventh scale degree of the diatonic scale, with a strong affinity for and leading melodically to the tonic (Benward &amp; Saker 2003, 203). For example, in the C major scale (white keys on a piano, starting on C), the leading note is the note B; and the leading note chord uses the notes B, D, and F: a diminished triad. In music theory, the leading note triad is symbolized by the Roman numeral vii [ dimdeg ]. By contrast, an upper leading-tone (Berger 1987, 148; Coker 1991, 50), which leads down, may be found as the seventh of the dominant seventh chord, which leads to the third of the tonic chord (in C: F of a G7 chord lead to E of a CM chord). { Scott Joplin &apos;s &quot; } { Maple Leaf Rag &quot; (Benward &amp; Saker 2003, 203) } [ Maple Leaf Rag seventh chord resolution.mid Play ] {. Note that the seventh resolves down by half step. } According to Ernst Kurth (1913) the major and minor third s contain &quot; latent &quot; tendencies towards the perfect fourth and whole-tone, respectively, and thus establish tonality. However, Carl Dahlhaus (1990) shows that this drive is in fact created through or with harmonic function, a root progression in another voice by a whole-tone or fifth, or melodically ( monophonically ) by the context of the scale. For example, the leading note of alternating C chord and F minor chord s is either the note E leading to F, if F is tonic, or A♭ leading to G, if C is tonic. In works from the 14th and 15th century Western tradition, the leading-note is created by the progression from imperfect to perfect consonance s, such as a major third to a perfect fifth or minor third to a unison. The same pitch outside of the imperfect consonance is not a leading note. As a diatonic function the leading-note is the seventh scale degree of any diatonic scale when the distance between it and the tonic is a single semitone. In diatonic scale s where there is a whole tone between the seventh scale degree and the tonic, such as the Mixolydian mode, the seventh degree is called instead, the subtonic. Leading-tone seventh chord in C major: vii halfdim 7 Leading-tone seventh chord in C major.mid Play. Leading-tone seventh chord in C minor: vii dim 7 Leading-tone seventh chord in C minor.mid Play. The leading-tone seventh chord s are vii halfdim 7 and vii dim 7,(Benward &amp; Saker 2003, 219) in major and in minor. [ See also ] Secondary leading-tone chord Musica ficta [ Sources ] Benward, Bruce, and Marilyn Nadine Saker (2003). Music: In Theory and Practice, Vol. I, seventh edition. Boston: McGraw-Hill. ISBN 978-0-07-294262-0. Berger, Karol (1987). Musica Ficta: Theories of Accidental Inflections in Vocal Polyphony from Marchetto da Padova to Gioseffo Zarlino. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-32871-3 (cloth); ISBN 0-521-54338-X (pbk). Coker, Jerry (1991). Elements of the Jazz Language for the Developing Improvisor. Miami, Fla.: CCP/Belwin, Inc. ISBN 1-57623-875-X. Dahlhaus, Carl (1990). Studies in the Origin of Harmonic Tonality, trans. Robert O. Gjerdingen, pp.184-85. Princeton: Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-09135-8. Kurth, Ernst (1913). Die Voraussetzungen der theoretischen Harmonik und der tonalen Darstellungssysteme, pp. 119ff. Bern: Akademische Buchhandlung M. Drechsel. Unaltered reprint edition, with an afterword by Carl DahlhausMunich: E. Katzbichler, 1973. ISBN 3-87397-014-7. Stainer, John, and William Alexander Barrett (eds.) (1876). A Dictionary of Musical Terms. London: Novello, Ewer and Co. New and revised edition, London: Novello &amp; Co, 1898. Category:Diatonic functions Category:Scale degrees ca:Sensible da:Ledetone de:Leitton es:Sensible (música) eo:Strebotono fr:Sensible (musique) it:Sensibile he:טון מוביל nl:Leidtoon ja:導音 no:Ledetone pl:Dźwięk prowadzący pt:Sensível ru:Вводный тон fi:Johtosävel