[ the 1986 Chinese film of the same name The Big Parade (1986 film) ] [ 1925 11 5 ] { 141 minutes } { Silent film English intertitles } { $18–22 million } The Big Parade is a 1925 silent film. { Variety film review; October 11, 1925, page 36. } { Variety film review; December 2, 1925, page 40. } { Harrison&apos;s Reports film review; December 5, 1925, page 195. } It tells the story of an idle rich boy who joins the US Army &apos;s Rainbow Division and is sent to France to fight in World War I, becomes friends with two working class men, experiences the horrors of trench warfare, and finds love with a French girl. The film was groundbreaking for not glorifying the war or its human costs, exemplified by the lead character&apos;s loss of a leg from battle wounds. It heavily influenced all subsequent war films, especially All Quiet on the Western Front (1930). It was adapted by Harry Behn and King Vidor (uncredited) from the play by Joseph Farnham and the autobiographical novel Plumes by Laurence Stallings, and directed by Vidor. It stars John Gilbert, Renée Adorée, Claire Adams, Karl Dane, Robert Ober and Tom O&apos;Brien. The Big Parade was one of the greatest hits of the 1920s, boosting Gilbert&apos;s career, and making Adorée a major star. Renée Adorée would soon be diagnosed with tuberculosis and die only a few years later. The film is the highest grossing silent film in cinema history, grossing $18–$22 million. [ May Richard P. Restoring The Big Parade The Moving Image 5 2 140–146 1532-3978 10.1353/mov.2005.0033 Fall 2005 August 11, 2010 ] In some larger cities this film was shown for a year or more continuously. After the film&apos;s producers found a clause in Vidor&apos;s contract, entitling the director to 20% of the net profits, studio lawyers called for a meeting with him. At this meeting, accountants played up the costs of the picture while downgrading their forecast of its potential success. King Vidor was thus persuaded to sell his stake in the film before receiving his percentage. However, the film&apos;s tremendous success did establish Vidor as one of MGM&apos;s top directors for the rest of his career. In 1992 The Big Parade was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being &quot; culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant &quot;. The film was re-issued in 1931 with a sound-track consisting of William Axt &apos;s score. Composer Carl Davis created a new orchestral score for the film in the 1980s (quoting the theme associated with Melisande in Axt&apos;s original setting), and it was restored and released on video in the late 1980s as part of the MGM and British television Thames Silents project. [ Plot ] In the United States in 1917, James &quot; Jim &quot; Apperson&apos;s idleness (in contrast to his hardworking brother) incurs the great displeasure of his wealthy businessman father. Then America enters World War I. Jim informs his worried mother that he has no intention of enlisting, but when he runs into his patriotic friends, he is persuaded to do just that, making his father very proud. During training, Jim makes friends with construction worker Slim and bartender Bull. Their unit ships out to France, where they are billeted at a farm in the village of Champillon for a while. All three men are attracted to Melisande, whose mother owns the farm. She repulses all their advances, but gradually warms to Jim. They fall in love, despite not being able to speak each other&apos;s language. One day, however, Jim receives a letter and a photograph from Justyn, which reveals that they are engaged. When Melisande sees the picture, she realizes the situation and runs off in tears. Before Jim can decide what to do, his unit is ordered to the front. Melisande hears the commotion and races back, just in time for the lovers to embrace and kiss. During the march, the Americans are strafed by an enemy fighter, their first taste of what is to come. The unit is sent to the attack immediately, advancing against first snipers and machine guns in the woods, then more machine guns, artillery, and poison gas in the open. They settle down in a makeshift line. Jim shelters in a shellhole with Slim and Bull. That night, orders come down for one man to go out and eliminate a troublesome mortar crew; Slim wins a spitting contest for the opportunity. He succeeds, but is spotted and wounded on the way back. After listening to Slim&apos;s pleas for help, Jim cannot stand it any longer and goes to his rescue against orders. Bull follows, but is shot and killed. By the time Jim reaches Slim, he is already dead. Jim is then shot in the leg. When a German comes to finish him off, Jim shoots and wounds him. The German starts crawling back to his line. Jim catches up to him in another shellhole, but, face to face, cannot bring himself to finish him off with his bayonet. Instead, he gives his erstwhile enemy a cigarette. Soon after, the German dies. Fortunately for Jim, he is not stuck in no man&apos;s land for long; the Americans attack, and he is taken away to a hospital. From another patient, he learns that Champillon has changed hands four times. Worried about Melisande, Jim sneaks out of the hospital and hitches a ride. When he gets to the farmhouse, he finds it damaged and empty. Melisande and her mother have joined a stream of refugees. Jim collapses and is carried off in an ambulance by retreating soldiers. After the war ends, Jim goes home to America. Before he arrives, his mother overhears Justyn and Jim&apos;s brother Harry discussing what to do; in Jim&apos;s absence, they have fallen in love. When Jim appears, it is revealed that he has had his leg amputated. Later, Jim tells his mother about Melisande; she tells him to go back and find her. When he returns to the farm, Melisande rushes into his arms. [ Cast ] John Gilbert - James Apperson Renée Adorée - Melisande Hobart Bosworth - Mr. Apperson Claire McDowell - Mrs. Apperson Claire Adams - Justyn Reed Robert Ober — Harry Tom O&apos;Brien — Bull Karl Dane - Slim Kathleen Key - Miss Apperson Rosita Marstini - Melisande&apos;s mother Julanne Johnston - Justine Devereux George Beranger - (as Andre Beranger) Frank Currier Harry Crocker  — Soldier (uncredited) Dan Mason - (uncredited) Carl &apos;Major&apos; Roup  — Extra (uncredited) Carl Voss - Officer (uncredited) [ See also ] List of early color feature films [ References ] [ External links ] [ 0015624 The Big Parade ] [ 5451 The Big Parade ] The Big Parade program booklet on archive.org The Big Parade at Virtual History Category:1925 films Category:American silent feature films Category:Black-and-white films Category:Epic films Category:Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer films Category:Films directed by King Vidor Category:United States National Film Registry films Category:War drama films Category:Western Front films (World War I) Category:Films shot in San Antonio, Texas Category:Films produced by Irving Thalberg de:Die große Parade es:El gran desfile fr:La Grande Parade nl:The Big Parade pl:Wielka parada ru:Большой парад