[ the river in Canada ] [ River yes Ottawa River Kichisìpi Rivière des Outaouais Ottawa-River.JPG 300 Canada Quebec Ontario Provinces 1271 146300 Carillon dam 1950 5351 749 Lake Capimitchigama Lac-Moselle La Vallée-de-la-Gatineau RCM Outaouais Quebec 47 36 N 75 48 W St. Lawrence River Montreal Quebec 45 27 N 74 05 W Ottawarivermap.png 300 Map of the Ottawa River drainage basin ] The Ottawa River ( [ Rivière des Outaouais ] ) is a river in the Canadian provinces of Ontario and Quebec. For most of its length, it now defines the border between these two provinces. [ Geography ] The river rises from its source in Lake Capimitchigama, in the Laurentian Mountains of central Quebec, and flows west to Lake Timiskaming. From there its route has been used to define the interprovincial border with Ontario. From Lake Timiskaming, the river flows southeast to Ottawa and Gatineau, where it tumbles over the Chaudière Falls and further takes in the Rideau and Gatineau rivers. The Ottawa River drains into the Lake of Two Mountains and the St. Lawrence River at Montreal. The total length of the river is [ 1271 km mi us ]; it drains an area of 146,300  km 2, 65% in Quebec and the rest in Ontario, with a mean discharge of 1,950 m 3 /s. [ http://atlas.nrcan.gc.ca/site/english/learningresources/facts/rivers.html Facts about Canada: Rivers Natural Resources Canada/Atlas of Canada 2008-02-24 ] The average annual mean waterflow measured at Carillon dam, near the Lake of Two Mountains, is 1,939 m 3 /s, with average annual extremes of 749 to 5,351 m 3 /s. Record historic levels since 1964 are a low of 529 in 2005 and a high of 8190 m 3 /s in 1976. [ http://www.ottawariver.ca/carillon.htm Historical Water Levels Summary, Ottawa River at Carillon Ottawa River Regulation Planning Board 2008-02-24 ] The river flows through large areas of deciduous and coniferous forest. These formed over thousands of years as trees recolonized the Ottawa Valley after the ice age { Anderson, T.W. 1989. Vegetation changes over 12000 years. Geos (3) 39-47. }. Generally, the coniferous forests occur on old sand plains left by retreating glaciers, or in wetter areas with clay substrate. The deciduous forests, dominated by maple, beech, oak and ash occur in more mesic areas with better soil { Braun, E.L. 1950. Deciduous Forests of Eastern North America. The Blakiston Co., Philadelphia, PA. } { Keddy, P.A. 2008. Earth, Water, Fire. An Ecological Profile of Lanark County. General Store Publishing House, Renfrew, Ontario. (revised from first edition 1999). }. These primeval forests were occasionally affected by natural fire, mostly started by lightning, which led to increased reproduction by pine and oak, as well as fire barrens and their associated species { Catling, P. and V. Brownell. 1999. Pages 392-405 in the book Anderson, R.C., J.S. Fralish and J.M. Baskin. 1999. Savannas, Barrens, and Rock Outcrop Plant Communities of North America. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. }. The vast areas of pine were exploited by early loggers { Hughson, J.W. and C.C. J. Bond. 1965. Hurling Down the Pine. The Historical Society of the Gatineau, Old Chelsea, Quebec. First edition 1964, Revised second edition 1965. } Later generations of logging removed hemlock for use in tanning leather, leaving a permanent deficit of hemlock in most forests { Keddy, C.J. 1993. Forest History of Eastern Ontario. Prepared for the Eastern Ontario Model Forest Group, Kemptville }. Associated with the logging and early settlement were vast wild fires which not only removed the forests, but led to soil erosion { Howe, C.D. 1915. The effect of repeated forest fires upon the reproduction of commercial species in Peterborough County, Ontario. Pages 116-211 in Forest Protection in Canada, 1913 1914, Commission of Conservation of Canada, William Briggs, Toronto. }. Consqeuntly nearly all the forests show varying degrees of human disturbance. Tracts of older forest are uncommon, and hence they are considered of considerable importance for conservation { Henry, M. and P. Quinby. 2009. Ontario Old Growth Forests. Fitzhenry and Whiteside, Markham, Ontario }. The Ottawa River has large areas of wetlands. Some of the more biologically important wetland areas include (going downsteam from Pembroke), the Westmeath sand dune/wetland complex, Mississippi Snye, Breckenridge Nature Reserve, Shirleys Bay, Ottawa Beach/Andrew Haydon Park, Petrie Island, the Duck Islands { Darbyshire, S.J. 1981. Upper Duck and Lower Duck Islands. Trail and Landscape 15:133-139. } and Greens Creek { Brunton, D.F. 1992. Life Science Areas of Natural and Scientific Interest in Site District 6-12. A Review and Assessment of Significant Natural Areas. Report prepared for Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources, Kemptville, Ontario. }. The Westmeath sand dune/wetland complex is significant for its relatively pristine sand dunes, few of which remain along the Ottawa River, and the many associated rare plants. Shirleys Bay has a biologically diverse shoreline alvar, as well as one of the largest silver maple swamps along the river. Like all wetlands, these depend upon the seasonal fluctuations in the water level { Keddy, P.A. 2010. Wetland Ecology: Principles and Conservation (2nd edition). Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK }. High water levels help create and maintain silver maple swamps { Toner, M, and P. Keddy. 1997. River hydrology and riparian wetlands: a predictive model for ecological assembly. Ecological Applications 7: 236-246 }, while low water periods allow many rare wetland plants to grow on the emerged sand and clay flats { Brunton, D.F. and B.M. Di Labio. Diversity and ecological characteristics of emergent beach flora along the Ottawa River in the Ottawa-Hull region, Quebec and Ontario. Naturaliste canadien 116: 179-191. }. There are five principle wetland vegetation types. One is swamp, mostly silver maple. There are four herbaceous vegetation types, named for the dominant plant species in them: Scirpus, Eleocharis, Sparganium and Typha { Day, R., P.A. Keddy, J. McNeill and T. Carleton. 1988. Fertility and disturbance gradients: a summary model for riverine marsh vegetation. Ecology 69:1044-1054 }. Which type occurs in a particular location depends upon factors such as substrate type, water depth, ice-scour and ferility. Inland, and mostly south of the river, older river channels, which date back to the end of the ice age, and no longer have flowing water, have sometimes filled with a different wetland type, peat bog. Examples include Mer Bleue and Alfred Bog { Brunton, D.F. 1992. Life Science Areas of Natural and Scientific Interest in Site District 6-12. A Review and Assessment of Significant Natural Areas. Report prepared for Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources, Kemptville, Ontario. }. Major tributaries include: Bonnechere River Coulonge River Dumoine River Gatineau River Kipawa River du Lièvre River Madawaska River Mattawa River Mississippi River Montreal River Rivière du Nord Noire River Petawawa River Rideau River Rouge River South Nation River { false-colour satellite image, the Ottawa River flows southeast, joining the } { St. Lawrence River which flows northeast. Heavily forested areas appear differing shades of orange/red, while farmland is tan shades. } communities along the Ottawa River include (in down-stream order): Notre-Dame-du-Nord, Quebec Ville-Marie, Quebec Témiscaming, Quebec Mattawa, Ontario Deux Rivières, Ontario Rapides-des-Joachims, Quebec Laurentian Hills, Ontario Deep River, Ontario Sheenboro, Quebec Petawawa, Ontario Pembroke, Ontario Westmeath, Ontario Waltham, Quebec Fort-Coulonge, Quebec La Passe, Ontario Campbell&apos;s Bay, Quebec Portage-du-Fort, Quebec McNab/Braeside, Ontario Arnprior, Ontario Quyon, Quebec Aylmer, Quebec Hull, Quebec Ottawa, Ontario Gatineau, Quebec Orléans, Ontario Masson-Angers, Quebec Clarence-Rockland, Ontario Thurso, Quebec Plaisance, Quebec Papineauville, Quebec Montebello, Quebec Fassett, Quebec L&apos;Orignal, Ontario Grenville, Quebec Hawkesbury, Ontario Carillon, Quebec Saint-André-Est, Quebec Rigaud, Quebec Saint-Placide, Quebec Hudson, Quebec Oka, Quebec Vaudreuil-sur-le-Lac, Quebec Vaudreuil-Dorion, Quebec Pincourt, Quebec Pointe-des-Cascades, Quebec [ Geology ] { Ottawa-Bonnechere Graben } The Ottawa River lies in the Ottawa-Bonnechere Graben, which is a Mesozoic rift valley that formed 175 million years ago. Much of the river flows through the Canadian Shield, although lower areas flow through limestone plains and glacial deposits { Chapman, L.J. and D.F. Putnam. 1984. The Physiography of Southern Ontario. Third edition. Ontario Geological Survey, Special Volume No.2. Government of Ontario, Toronto. }. Following the retreat of the glacier s from the area at the end of the last ice age, the valley was flooded by an arm of the Atlantic Ocean known as the Champlain Sea. Fossil remains of marine life have been found in marine clay formed during that time. Sand deposits from this era have produced vast plains, often dominated by pine forests, as well as localized areas of sand dunes, such as Westmeath and Constance Bay { Chapman, L.J. and D.F. Putnam. 1984. The Physiography of Southern Ontario. Third edition. Ontario Geological Survey, Special Volume No.2. Government of Ontario, Toronto. }. Clay deposits from this period have resulted in areas of poor drainage, large swamps, and peat bog s in some ancient channels of this river. Hence, the distribution of forests and wetlands is very much a product of these past glacial events { Keddy, P.A. 2008. Earth, Water, Fire. An Ecological Profile of Lanark County. General Store Publishing House, Renfrew, Ontario. (revised from first edition 1999). }. Another consequence was the formations of large deposits of a material commonly known as Leda clay; these deposits become highly unstable after heavy rains. Numerous landslide s have occurred as a result. The former site of the town of Lemieux, Ontario collapsed into the South Nation River in 1993; however, the residents had already been relocated because of the suspected instability of the earth in that location. [ History ] [ Ottawa River timber trade ] An Algonquin Family As it does to this day, the river played a vital role in life of the Algonquin people, who lived throughout its watershed at contact. The river is called Kichisìpi, meaning &quot; Great River &quot; in Anicinàbemowin, the Algonquin language. The Algonquin define themselves in terms of their position on the river, referring to themselves as the Omàmiwinini, &apos;down-river people&apos;. Although a majority of the Algonquin First Nation lives in Quebec, the entire Ottawa Valley is Algonquin traditional territory. Present settlement is a result of adaptations made as a result of settler pressures. [ http://www.aboriginalaffairs.gov.on.ca/english/negotiate/algonquin/algonquin.asp Algonquin Land Claim with Ontario Ontario Ministry of Aboriginal Affairs 2009-06-30 ] { Mattawa, Ontario. } { Some } early European explorers, possibly considering the Ottawa River to be more significant than the Upper St. Lawrence River, applied the name River Canada to the Ottawa River and the St. Lawrence River below the confluence at Montreal. As the extent of the Great Lakes became clear and the river began to be regarded as a tributary, it was variously known as the Grand River, &quot; Great River &quot; or Grand River of the Algonquins before the present name was settled upon. This name change resulted from the Ottawa people s &apos; control of the river circa 1685. However, only one band of Ottawa, the Kinouncherpirini or Keinouch, ever inhabited the Ottawa Valley. In 1615, Samuel de Champlain and Étienne Brûlé, assisted by Algonquin guides, were the first Europeans to travel up the Ottawa River and follow the water route west along the Mattawa and French Rivers to the Great Lakes. See Canadian Canoe Routes (early). For the following two centuries, this route was used by French fur trade rs, Voyageurs and Coureur des bois to Canada&apos;s interior. The river posed serious hazards to these travelers. The section near Deux Rivières used to have spectacular and wild rapids, namely the Rapide de la Veillée, the Trou, the Rapide des Deux Rivières, and the Rapide de la Roche Capitaine. In 1800, explorer Daniel Harmon reported 14 crosses marking the deaths of voyageurs who had drowned in the dangerous waters along this section of the Ottawa. { Ontario Heritage Foundation, Ministry of Culture and Communications } The main trading posts along the river were: Lachine, Fort Coulong, Lac des Allumettes, Mattawa House where west-bound canoes left the river and Fort Témiscamingue. From Lake Timiskaming a portage led north to the Abitibi River and James Bay. In the early 19th century, the Ottawa River and its tributaries were used to gain access to large virgin forests of white pine. A booming trade in timber developed, and large rafts of logs were floated down the river. A scattering of small subsistence farming communities developed along the shores of the river to provide manpower for the lumber camps in winter. In 1832, following the War of 1812, the Ottawa River gained strategic importance when the Carillon Canal was completed. Together with the Rideau Canal, the Carillon Canal was constructed to provide an alternate military supply route to Kingston and Lake Ontario, bypassing the route along the Saint Lawrence River. [ http://www.pc.gc.ca/lhn-nhs/qc/canalcarillon/natcul/natcul2_E.asp Carillon Canal National Historic Site of Canada, Cultural Heritage Parks Canada 2009-02-09 ] [ Power generation ] A pulp and paper mill (at Témiscaming ) and several hydroelectric dams have been constructed on the river. In 1950, the dam at Rapides-des-Joachims, was built, forming Holden Lake behind it and thereby submerging the rapids and portages at Deux Rivières.. These hydro dams, like all dams on rivers, have had negative effects upon shoreline and wetland ecosystems { Keddy, P.A. 2010. Wetland Ecology: Principles and Conservation (2nd edition). Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.497 p. }, and are thought to also be responsible for the near extermination of American eels, which were once an abundant species in the river, but which are now uncommon. As an economic route, its importance was eclipsed by railroad and highways in the 20th century. It is no longer used for log driving, however, it is still extensively used for recreational boating. Some 20,000 pleasure boaters visit the Carillon Canal annually. Today, Outaouais Herald Emeritus at the Canadian Heraldic Authority is named after the river. [ Hydroelectric installations ] Hydroelectric installations on the Upper Ottawa (in downstream order): Installation Type Generating cap. Year built Name of reservoir Operator Bourque Dam Dam n/a 1949 Dozois Reservoir Hydro-Québec Rapide-7 Generating station 48 MW 1941 / 1949 Decelles Lake Hydro-Québec Rapide-2 Run of river g.s. 48 MW 1954 n/a Hydro-Québec Rapides-des-Quinze Run of river g.s. 95 MW 1923 n/a Hydro-Québec Rapides-des-îles Run of river g.s. 147 MW 1966 n/a Hydro-Québec Première-Chute Run of river g.s. 130 MW 1968 n/a Hydro-Québec Lower Ottawa (in downstream order): Installation Type Generating cap. Year built Name of reservoir Operator Otto Holden Run of river g.s. 243 MW 1952 n/a Ontario Power Generation Des Joachims Run of river g.s. 429 MW 1950 Holden Lake Ontario Power Generation Bryson Run of river g.s. 61 MW 1925 n/a Hydro-Québec Chenaux Run of river g.s. 144 MW 1950 n/a Ontario Power Generation Chute-des-Chats (Chats Falls) Run of river g.s. 185 MW 1931 Lac des Chats Hydro-Québec and OPG * Hull-2 Run of river g.s. 27 MW 1920 n/a Hydro-Québec Carillon Run of river g.s. 752 MW 1962 n/a Hydro-Québec * Ontario Power Generation operates generators 2, 3, 4, and 5 with a capacity of 96 MW; and Hydro-Québec operates generators 6, 7, 8, and 9 with a capacity of 89 MW. [ See also ] Lake of Two Mountains List of Ontario rivers List of crossings of the Ottawa River List of islands of Ontario#Ottawa_River List of longest rivers of Canada Southern Ontario Eastern Ontario [ Ottawa Eastern Ontario ] List of Quebec rivers Rivière des Mille Îles Rivière des Prairies Quebec [ References ] [ External links ] Ottawa-Gatineau Watershed Atlas (OGWA) Ottawa River Regulation Planning Board Ottawa Riverkeeper The Ottawa River Algonkin History Category:Geography of Ottawa Category:Rivers of Ontario Category:Rivers of Montérégie Category:Geography of Gatineau Category:Borders of Quebec Category:Borders of Ontario Category:Tributaries of the Saint Lawrence River Category:Rivers of Outaouais af:Outaouaisrivier ar:نهر أوتاوا be:Рака Атава bg:Отава (река) ca:Riu Ottawa cs:Ottawa (řeka) de:Ottawa River et:Ottawa jõgi es:Río Ottawa eo:Otavo (rivero) fr:Rivière des Outaouais hr:Ottawa (rijeka) it:Ottawa (fiume) he:אוטווה (נהר) lt:Otava (Kanados upė) mr:ओटावा नदी nl:Ottawa (rivier) ja:オタワ川 no:Ottawa (elv) pl:Ottawa (rzeka) pt:Rio Ottawa ro:Râul Ottawa ru:Оттава (река) simple:Ottawa River sr:Отава (река) fi:Ottawa (joki) sv:Ottawafloden uk:Оттава (річка) vi:Sông Ottawa zh:渥太華河