Chronicler redirects here; &quot; the Chronicler &quot; is a term used for the anonymous compiler of the Hebrew Books of Chronicles. Generally a chronicle ( [ chronica ], from Greek [ grc χρονικά ], from [ grc χρόνος ], chronos, &quot; time &quot; ) is a historical account of facts and events ranged in chronological order, as in a time line. Typically, equal weight is given for historically important events and local events, the purpose being the recording of events that occurred, seen from the perspective of the chronicler. This is in contrast to a narrative or history, which sets selected events in a meaningful interpretive context and excludes those the author does not see as important. In modern times various contemporary newspapers or other periodicals have adopted &quot; chronicle &quot; as part of their name. Various fictional stories have also adopted &quot; chronicle &quot; as part of their title, to give an impression of epic proportion to their stories. A chronicle which traces world history is called a universal chronicle. Scholars categorize the genre of chronicle into two subgroups: live chronicles, and dead chronicles. A dead chronicle is one where the author gathers his list of events up to the time of his writing, but does not record further events as they occur. A live chronicle is where one or more authors add to a chronicle in a regular fashion, recording contemporary events shortly after they occur. Because of the immediacy of the information, historians tend to value live chronicles, such as annals, over dead ones. The term often refers to a book written by a chronicler in the Middle Ages describing historical events in a country, or the lives of a nobleman or a clergyman, although it is also applied to a record of public events. Chronicles are the predecessors of modern &quot; time line s &quot; rather than analytical histories. They represent accounts, in prose or verse, of local or distant events over a considerable period of time, both the lifetime of the individual chronicler and often those of several subsequent continuator s. If the chronicles deal with events year by year, they are often called annal s. Unlike the modern historian, most chroniclers tended to take their information as they found it, and made little attempt to separate fact from legend. The point-of-view of most chroniclers is highly localised, to the extent that many anonymous chroniclers can be sited in individual abbey s. The most important English chronicles are the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, started under the patronage of King Alfred in the 9th century and continued until the 12th century, and the Chronicles of England, Scotland and Ireland (1577–87) by Raphael Holinshed and other writers; the latter documents were important sources of materials for Elizabethan drama. { &apos;A Glossary of Literary Terms&apos; - M.H. Abrams } Later 16th century Scottish chronicles, written after the Reformation, shape history according to Catholic or Protestant viewpoints. It is impossible to say how many chronicles exist, as the many ambiguities in the definition of the genre make it impossible to draw clear distinctions of what should or should not be included. However, the Encyclopedia of the Medieval Chronicle lists some 2,500 items written between 300 and 1500 AD. [ Alphabetical list of notable chronicles ] Anglo-Saxon Chronicle — England Annales Cambriae - Wales Annales seu cronicae incliti Regni Poloniae - Poland Annals of Inisfallen — Ireland Annals of Lough Cé - Ireland Annals of the Four Masters — Ireland Annals of Spring and Autumn — China Babylonian Chronicles — Mesopotamia Anonymous Bulgarian Chronicle — Bulgaria Bodhi Vamsa — Sri Lanka Culavamsa — Sri Lanka ( Chronica Polonorum ): see Gesta principum Polonorum Chronica Gentis Scotorum Chronica seu originale regum et principum Poloniae - Poland &apos;&apos;Chronicon&apos;&apos; of Eusebius Chronicon Scotorum - Ireland Dioclean Priest&apos;s Chronicle — Europe Chronica Hungarorum - History of Hungary Chronicle of Jean de Venette - France Chronographia - Byzantium Cronaca fiorentina - Chronicle of Florence up to the end of the 14th Century by Baldassarre Bonaiuti Cronicae et gesta ducum sive principum Polonorum - Poland Croyland Chronicle — England Dawn-Breakers (Nabil&apos;s Narrative) — Bahá&apos;í Faith and Middle East Dipavamsa — Sri Lanka Eric&apos;s Chronicle — Sweden Eusebius Chronicle — Mediterranean and Middle East Fragmentary Annals of Ireland - Ireland Froissart&apos;s Chronicles — Western Europe Galician-Volhynian Chronicle — Ukraine Gesta principum Polonorum Henry of Livona Chronicle — Eastern Europe History of Greater Britain, Historia majoris Britanniae, tam Angliae quam Scotiae, John Major History of the Scottish People, Historia Gentis Scotorum, Hector Boece History of Scotland, Rerum Scoticarum Historia, George Buchanan History of Scotland, De origine, moribus, ac rebus gestis Scotiae libri decem, John Leslie The Historie and Chronicles of Scotland, Robert Lindsay of Pitscottie History of the Prophets and Kings — Middle East and Mediterranean Hustyn Chronicle - Eastern Europe Jans der Enikel — Europe and Mediterranean &apos;&apos; Joannis de Czarnkow chronicon Polonorum - Poland Jerome&apos;s Chronicle — Mediterranean and Middle East Kaiserchronik - Central and southern Europe, Germany Kano Chronicle — Nigeria Lethrense Chronicle — Denmark Mahavamsa — Sri Lanka Manx Chronicle - Isle of Man Nabonidus Chronicle — Mesopotamia Nuova Cronica — Florence Paschale Chronicle — Mediterranean Puranas — India Qur&apos;an — Middle East Rajatarangini — Kashmir Records of the Three Kingdoms — China Roit and Quheil of Tyme - Scotland, Adam Abell Primary Chronicle — Eastern Europe Chronicle of the Slavs — Europe Scotichronicon Swiss illustrated chronicles — Switzerland &apos;&apos;Chronicon&apos;&apos; of Thietmar of Merseburg [ References ] [ See also ] Chronicles are two canonical books of the Old Testament. See Books of Chronicles. List of English chronicles Medieval Chronicle Society Category:Medieval literature az:Salnamə be:Летапіс be-x-old:Летапіс bg:Летопис ca:Crònica cs:Kronika da:Krønike de:Chronik et:Kroonika es:Crónica eo:Kroniko eu:Kronika (historia) fr:Chronique médiévale gl:Crónica ko:연대기 hr:Kronika io:Kroniko ia:Chronica it:Cronaca (genere letterario) he:כרוניקה kk:Хроника lt:Kronika hu:Krónika (műfaj) nl:Kroniek ja:年代記 no:Krønike pl:Kronika pt:Crónica (historiografia) ro:Letopiseț ru:Хроника sk:Kronika (stredovek) sl:Kronika sh:Ljetopis fi:Kronikka sv:Krönika th:พงศาวดาร tr:Vakanüvis uk:Літопис vi:Biên niên sử zh:编年体