[ Clay Mathematics Institute Clay-logo.PNG 250 Motto: Dedicated to increasing and disseminating mathematical knowledge 1998 non-profit Cambridge, Massachusetts Cambridge, Massachusetts President Landon T. Clay Lavinia D. Clay Thomas Clay ] One Bow Street The Clay Mathematics Institute (CMI) is a private, non-profit foundation, based in Cambridge, Massachusetts. The Institute is dedicated to increasing and disseminating mathematical knowledge. It gives out various awards and sponsorships to promising mathematicians. The institute was founded in 1998 through the sponsorship of Boston businessman Landon T. Clay. Harvard mathematician Arthur Jaffe was the first president of CMI. While the institute is best known for its Millennium Prize Problems, it carries out a wide range of activities, including a postdoctoral program (ten Clay Research Fellows are supported each year) and an annual summer school, the proceedings of which are published jointly with the American Mathematical Society. [ Governance ] The Institute is run according to a standard structure comprising a board of directors that decides on grant-awarding and research proposals, and a scientific advisory committee that oversees and approves the board&apos;s decisions. [ February 2008 ], the board is made up of members of the Clay family, whereas the advisory committee is composed of leading authorities in mathematics, namely Sir Andrew Wiles, Yum-Tong Siu, Richard Melrose, Gregory Margulis, James Carlson, and Simon Donaldson. James Carlson is the current president of CMI. [ Millennium Prize Problems ] [ Millennium Prize Problems ] The institute is best known for establishing the Millennium Prize Problems on May 24, 2000. These seven problems are considered by CMI to be &quot; important classic questions that have resisted solution over the years &quot;. For each problem, the first person to solve it will be awarded $1,000,000 by the CMI. In announcing the prize, CMI drew a parallel to Hilbert&apos;s problems, which were proposed in 1900, and had a substantial impact on 20th century mathematics. Of the initial twenty-three Hilbert problems, most of which have been solved, only the Riemann hypothesis (formulated in 1859) is included in the seven Millennium Prize Problems. { Arthur Jaffe&apos;s first-hand account of how this Millennium Prize came about can be read in The Millennium Grand Challenge in Mathematics } For each problem, the Institute had a professional mathematician write up an official statement of the problem, which will be the main standard by which a given solution will be measured against. The seven problems are: [ Clay Mathematics Institute March 18, 2010 PDF Prize for Resolution of the Poincaré Conjecture Awarded to Dr. Grigoriy Perelman http://www.claymath.org/poincare/millenniumPrizeFull.pdf March 18, 2010 The Clay Mathematics Institute (CMI) announces today that Dr. Grigoriy Perelman of St. Petersburg, Russia, is the recipient of the Millennium Prize for resolution of the Poincaré conjecture. ] P versus NP The Hodge conjecture The Poincaré conjecture - solved, by Grigori Perelman The Riemann hypothesis Yang–Mills existence and mass gap Navier–Stokes existence and smoothness The Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture. Some of the mathematicians who were involved in the selection and presentation of the seven problems were Atiyah, Bombieri, Connes, Deligne, Fefferman, Milnor, Mumford, Wiles, and Witten. [ Other awards ] [ The Clay Research Award ] [ Clay Research Award ] In recognition of major breakthroughs in mathematical research, the institute has an annual prize - the Clay Research Award. It recipients to date are Ian Agol, Manindra Agrawal, Yves Benoist, Manjul Bhargava, Danny Calegari, Alain Connes, Nils Dencker, Alex Eskin, David Gabai, Ben Green, Christopher Hacon, Richard Hamilton, Michael Harris, Jeremy Kahn, Laurent Lafforgue, Gérard Laumon, Vladimir Markovic, James McKernan, Ngô Bảo Châu, Jonathan Pila, Jean-François Quint, Oded Schramm, Stanislav Smirnov, Terence Tao, Clifford Taubes, Richard Taylor, Claire Voisin, Jean-Loup Waldspurger, Andrew Wiles, and Edward Witten. [ The Olympiad award ] [ June 2008 ] The CMI also offers the Clay Olympiad Scholar Award for the most creative solution to a problem on the United States of America Mathematical Olympiad. [ Other activities ] Besides the Millennium Prize Problems, the Clay Mathematics Institute also supports mathematics via the awarding ofresearch fellowships (which range from two to five years, and are aimed at younger mathematicians), as well as shorter-termscholarships for programs, individual research, and book writing. The Institute also has a yearly Clay Research Award, recognizing major breakthroughs in mathematical research. Finally, the Institute also organizes a number of summer schools, conferences, workshops, public lectures, and outreach activities aimed primarily at junior mathematicians (from the high school to postdoctoral level).CMI publications are available in PDF form at most six months after they appear in print. [ References ] [ Keith J. Devlin ], The Millennium Problems: The Seven Greatest Unsolved Mathematical Puzzles of Our Time, Basic Books (October, 2002), ISBN 0-465-01729-0. [ External links ] The Clay Mathematics Institute The Millennium Grand Challenge in Mathematics The Millennium Prize Problems The Clay Mathematics Institute Online Library [ 8716 Millennium Problems ] [ 42 22 20 N 71 6 58 W scale:1000_source:jawiki title ] Category:Organizations established in 1998 Category:Mathematical institutes Category:Cambridge, Massachusetts Category:Research institutes in the United States Category:1998 establishments in the United States ar:معهد كلاي للرياضيات cs:Clayův matematický ústav da:Clay Mathematics Institute de:Clay Mathematics Institute et:Clay Matemaatikainstituut es:Clay Mathematics Institute fr:Institut de mathématiques Clay ko:클레이 수학연구소 it:Istituto matematico Clay he:מכון קליי למתמטיקה ja:クレイ数学研究所 pms:Anstitù ëd matemàtica Clay pl:Instytut Matematyczny Claya pt:Clay Mathematics Institute ru:Математический институт Клэя simple:Clay Mathematics Institute sl:Clayjev matematični inštitut fi:Clay Mathematics Institute vi:Viện Toán học Clay zh:克雷數學研究所