[ American Dipper LC IUCN3.1 American Dipper.jpg Animal ia Chordata Aves Passeriformes Cinclidae Cinclus C. mexicanus Cinclus mexicanus Swainson, 1827 Cinclus mexicanus map.svg ] Juvenile in Nason Creek, Washington, USA { Joseph Wolf, 1867 } The American Dipper (Cinclus mexicanus), also known as a Water Ouzel, is a stocky dark grey bird with a head sometimes tinged with brown, and white feather s on the eyelids cause the eyes to flash white as the bird blinks. It is 16.5  cm long and weighs on average 46 g. It has long legs, and bobs its whole body up and down during pauses as it feeds on the bottom of fast-moving, rocky stream s. It inhabits the mountainous regions of Central America and western North America from Panama to Alaska. This species, like other dippers, is equipped with an extra eyelid called a &quot; nictitating membrane &quot; that allows it to see underwater, and scales that close its nostrils when submerged. Dippers also produce more oil than most birds, which may help keep them warmer when seeking food underwater. In most of its habits, it closely resembles its Europe an counterpart, the White-throated Dipper, Cinclus cinclus, which is also sometimes known as a Water Ouzel. It feeds on aquatic insect s and their larvae, including dragonfly nymphs, small crayfish, and caddisfly larvae. It may also take tiny fish or tadpole s. The song consists of high whistles or trills peee peee pijur pijur repeated a few times. Both sexes of this bird sing year round. It defends a linear territory along streams. Its habit of diving and walking along the bottom of streams in search of food sometimes makes it the occasional prey of large salmon or other anadromous fish. The American Dipper&apos;s nest is a globe-shaped structure with a side entrance, close to water, on a rock ledge, river bank, behind a waterfall or under a bridge. The normal clutch is 2-4 white eggs, incubated solely by the female, which hatch after about 15–17 days, with another 20–25 days to fledging. The male helps to feed the young. It is usually a permanent resident, moving slightly south or to lower elevations if necessary to find food or unfrozen water. The presence of this indicator species shows good water quality; it has vanished from some locations due to pollution or increased silt load in streams. There is at least one record of an American Dipper being eaten by a Dolly Varden Trout. [ Wilson Bulletin Dipper swallowed by trout Charles L. Elliott Steve Peck http://elibrary.unm.edu/sora/Wilson/v092n04/p0524-p0524.pdf 92 4 524 December 1980 ] [ References ] [ BirdLife International 2004 51519 Cinclus mexicanus 12 May 2006 ] Database entry includes justification for why this species is of least concern Erlich et al. The Birder&apos;s Handbook Stiles and Skutch, A guide to the birds of Costa Rica ISBN 0-8014-9600-4 [ External links ] [ Cinclus mexicanus ] American Dipper - &apos;&apos;Cinclus mexicanus&apos;&apos; - USGS Patuxent Bird Identification InfoCenter American Dipper Species Account - Cornell Lab of Ornithology American Dipper Information and Photos - South Dakota Birds and Birding Stamps for United States The Dipper - Plain, yes, but not so ordinary American Dipper photo gallery VIREO Short radio episode &apos;&apos;The Water-Ouzel&apos;&apos;, from The Mountains of California, by John Muir 1894. California Legacy Project. The American Dipper and Biodiversity Conservation Alliance Category:Cinclus Category:Indicator species of North America Dipper, American Dipper, American Dipper, American Dipper, American Dipper, American Dipper, American Dipper, American Dipper, American Dipper, American Dipper, American Dipper, American Dipper, American Category:Animals described in 1827 bg:Американски воден кос br:Dourlaouig Amerika ca:Merla d&apos;aigua americana de:Grauwasseramsel es:Cinclus mexicanus eo:Nordamerika cinklo eu:Cinclus mexicanus fr:Cincle d&apos;Amérique hu:Szürke vízirigó ja:メキシコカワガラス pl:Pluszcz meksykański fi:Amerikankoskikara sv:Grå strömstare uk:Пронурок американський