[ February 2011 ] [ 9 May 1746 9 May 1746 ] { Beaune, } { Côte-d&apos;Or } [ 28 July 1818 28 July 1818 ] { Paris } { French } { Mathematics, } { Engineering, } { Education } { Descriptive geometry } { French Revolution } Gaspard Monge, Comte de Péluse (9 May 1746 { Archives Départementales de la Côte d&apos;or registre paroissial de Beaune 1745-1746, FRAD021_057_MI05R027, vue n° 174 } – 28 July 1818) was a French mathematician, revolutionary, and inventor of descriptive geometry, the theoretical basis on which technical drawing is based. During the French Revolution he served as minister of the Marine and was involved in the reform of the French educational system, founding the École Polytechnique. [ Early life ] Monge was born at Beaune, Côte-d&apos;Or, the son of a merchant. He was educated at the college of the Oratorians at Beaune. In 1762 he went to the Collège de la Trinité at Lyon, where, one year after he had begun studying, he was made a teacher of physics at the age of seventeen. [ http://www-history.mcs.st-andrews.ac.uk/Biographies/Monge.html School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of St Andrews, Scotland O&apos;Connor and J.J. Robertson E.F. Gaspard Monge 26 March 20 ] After finishing his education in 1764 he returned to Beaune, where he made a large scale plan of the town, inventing the methods of observation and constructing the necessary instruments; the plan was presented to the town, and is still preserved in their library. An officer of engineers who saw it wrote to the commandant of the École Royale du Génie at Mézières, recommending Monge to him and he was given a job as a draftsman. [ Career ] Those studying at the school were drawn from the aristocracy, so he was not allowed admission to the institution itself. His manual skill was highly regarded, but his mathematical skills were not made use of. Nevertheless he worked on the development of his ideas in his spare time. At this time came to contact with Charles Bossut, the professor of mathematics at the École Royale. &quot; I was a thousand times tempted, &quot; he said long afterwards, &quot; to tear up my drawings in disgust at the esteem in which they were held, as if I had been good for nothing better. &quot; After a year at the École Royale Monge was asked to produce a plan for a fortification in such a way as to optimise its defensive arrangement. There was an established method for doing this which involved lengthy calculations but Monge devised a way of solving the problems by using drawings. At first his solution was not accepted, since it had not taken the time judged to be necessary, but upon examination the value of the work was recognized, and Monge&apos;s exceptional abilities were recognized.After Bossut left the École Royale du Génie Monge took his place in January 1769, and in 1770 he was also appointed instructor in experimental physics. In 1777 he married Cathérine Huart, who owned a forge. This caused Monge to develop an interest in metallurgy. In 1780 he became a member of the Académie; his friendship with C.L. Berthollet began at this time. In 1783, after leaving Mézières, he was, on the death of É. Bézout, appointed examiner of naval candidates. Although pressed by the minister to prepare a complete course of mathematics, he declined to do so, on the grounds that this would deprive Mme Bézout of her only income, that from the sale of the textbooks written by her late husband. In 1786 he wrote and published his Traité élémentaire de la statique. [ 1789 and after ] { Le Père Lachaise Cemetery in Paris } Unsurprisingly the French Revolution completely changed the course of Monge&apos;s career. He was a strong supporter of the Revolution, and in 1792, on the creation by the Legislative Assembly of an executive council, Monge accepted the office of Minister of the Marine, and held this office from 10 August 1792 to 10 April 1793, when he resigned. When the Committee of Public Safety made an appeal to the academics to assist in the defence of the republic, he applied himself wholly to these operations, and distinguished himself by his energy, writing the Description de l&apos;art de fabriquer les canons and Avis aux ouvriers en fer sur la fabrication de l&apos;acier. He took a very active part in the measures for the establishment of the Ecole Normale (which existed only during the first four months of the year 1795), and of the school for public works, afterwards the École Polytechnique, and was at each of them professor for descriptive geometry. Géométrie descriptive. Leçons données aux écoles normales was published in 1799 from transcriptions of his letures given in 1795. He later published Application de l&apos;analyse à la géométrie, which enlarged on the lectures. From May 1796 to October 1797 Monge was in Italy with C.L. Berthollet and some artists to select the paintings and sculptures being levied from the Italians. While there he became friendly with of General Bonaparte. On his return to France h as appointedDirector of theEcole Pytechnique, but early in 798 he was sent to Rome on a mission which ended in the establishment, under A. Masséna, of the short-lived Roman Republic; and from there he joned the expedition to Egypt, taking part with Berthollet as well in various operations of the war as in the scientific work of the Institut d&apos;Égypte and Egyptian Institute of Sciences and Arts; they accompanied Bonaparte to Syria, and returned with him in 1798 to France. Monge was appointed president of the Egyptian commission, and he resumed his connection with the École Polytechnique. His later mathematical papers are published (1794 –1816) in the Journal and the Correspondence of the École Polytechnique. On the formation of the Sénat conservateur he was appointed a member of that body, with an ample provision and the title of count of Pelusium (Comte de Péluse), and became the Sénat conservateur&apos;s president in 1806-07; but on the fall of Napoleon he was deprived of all his honours, and even excluded from the list of members of the reconstituted Institute. Monge died at Paris on 28 July 1818 and was interred in a mausoleum in the Le Père Lachaise Cemetery in Paris. His remains was later transferred to the Panthéon. A statue portraying him was erected in Beaune in 1849. His name is one of the 72 names inscribed on the Eiffel Tower. [ Published works ] &quot; Sur la théorie des déblais et des remblais &quot; (Mém. de l’acad. de Paris, 1781), which is an elegant investigation of the problem with earthworks referred to in the title and establishes in connection with it his capital discovery of the curves of curvature of a surface. Leonhard Euler, in his 1760 paper on curvature in the Berlin Memoirs for, had considered, not the normals of the surface, but the normals of the plane sections through a particular normal, so that the question of the intersection of successive normals of the surface had never presented itself to him. Monge&apos;s paper gives the ordinary differential equation of the curves of curvature, and establishes the general theory in a very satisfactory manner; the application to the interesting particular case of the ellipsoid was first made by him in a later paper in 1795. (Monge&apos;s 1781 memoir is also the earliest known anticipation of Linear Programming type of problems, in particular of the transportation problem. Related to that, the Monge soil-transport problem leads to a weak-topology definition of a distance between distributions rediscovered many times since by such as L. V. Kantorovich, P. Levy, L. N. Wasserstein, and others; and bearing their names in various combinations in various contexts.) A paper in the volume for 1783 relates to the production of water by the combustion of hydrogen. Monge&apos;s results had been anticipated by Henry Cavendish. [ Maurice Dumas A History of Technology and Invention 3 1980 John Murray London 0-7195-3732-0 405 ] The Art of Manufacturing Cannon (1793) Géométrie descriptive. Leçons données aux écoles normales (Descriptive Geometry): a transcription of Monge&apos;s lectures. (1799) MONGE, Gaspard. [ See also ] Monge array Monge-Ampère equation Monge&apos;s theorem List of atheists in science and technology [ Notes ] [ References ] Sakarovitch, Joel, 2005, &quot; Géométrie descriptive &quot; in Grattan-Guinness, I., ed., Landmark Writings in Western Mathematics. Elsevier: 225-41. Pairault, François Pairault, 2000, Gaspard Monge, le fondateur de Polytechnique. ISBN 2-235-02271-5. Aubry, Paul V., Monge, Le savant ami de Napoléon Bonaparte, Paris, Gauthiers-Villars, 1954 [ External links ] [ Gaspard Monge Gaspard Monge ] [ Monge ] books.google.com An Elementary Treatise on Statics With a Biographical Notice of the Author (Biddle, Philadelphia, 1851) books.google.com An elementary treatise on descriptive geometry, with a theory of shadows and of perspective (Weale, London, 1851) [ Minister of the Navy and the Colonies François Joseph de Gratet, vicomte Dubouchage Jean Dalbarade 10 August 1792 - 10 April 1793 ] [ Monge, Gaspard French mathematician 9 May 1746 Beaune 28 July 1818 Paris ] Category:1746 births Category:1818 deaths Category:People from Beaune Category:Commission des Sciences et des Arts members Category:18th-century mathematicians Category:19th-century mathematicians Category:French mathematicians Category:Differential geometers Category:Burials at the Panthéon, Paris Category:Burials at Père Lachaise Cemetery Category:Members of the French Academy of Sciences Category:Ministers of Marine and the Colonies Category:École Normale Supérieure faculty ar:غاسبار مونج be:Гаспар Монж bg:Гаспар Монж cs:Gaspard Monge da:Gaspard Monge de:Gaspard Monge es:Gaspard Monge eo:Gaspard Monge fa:گاسپار مونژ fr:Gaspard Monge ko:가스파르 몽주 it:Gaspard Monge ht:Gaspard Monge la:Caspar Monge hu:Gaspard Monge nl:Gaspard Monge ja:ガスパール・モンジュ nn:Gaspard Monge pms:Gaspard Monge pl:Gaspard Monge pt:Gaspard Monge ro:Gaspard Monge ru:Монж, Гаспар sq:Gaspard Monge sk:Gaspard Monge sl:Gaspard Monge fi:Gaspard Monge sv:Gaspard Monge tr:Gaspard Monge uk:Гаспар Монж vi:Gaspard Monge zh:加斯帕尔·蒙日