[ Roger II the Viscount of Carcassonne Roger II Trencavel ] [ Рожер II cult July 2011 ] [ 1095 12 22 yes ] { Mileto } [ 1154 2 26 1095 12 22 yes ] { Palermo } { Cathedral of Palermo } Roger II ( Mileto 22 December 1095 { Houben, p. 30. } – 26 February 1154) was King of Sicily, son of Roger I of Sicily and successor to his brother Simon. He began his rule as Count of Sicily in 1105, later became Duke of Apulia and Calabria (1127), then King of Sicily (1130). Roger had succeeded in uniting all the Norman conquests in Italy into one kingdom with a strong centralized government. [ Background ] [ Norman conquest of southern Italy ] Coin of Roger II of Sicily, silver Ducale, Brindisi mint. By 999, Norman adventurers had come to southern Italy. [ Barber Malcolm The Two Cities: Medieval Europe 1050-1320 2004 Routledge 0-415-17415-5 209 ] By 1016, they were involved in the complex local politics where Lombards were fighting against the Byzantine Empire. These mercenaries fought the enemies of the Italian city-states, but in the following century they gradually became the rulers of the major polities south of Rome. At the time of the birth of his youngest son, in 1095, [ Houben Hubert Roger II of Sicily: a Ruler Between East and West 1997 (English translation 2002) Cambridge University Press 0-521-65573-0 xvii, Chronology ] Roger I ruled the County of Sicily, his nephew, Roger Borsa, was the Duke of Apulia and Calabria, and his great nephew, Richard II of Capua, was the Prince of Capua. Alongside these three major rulers were a large number of minor count s, who effectively exercised sovereign power in their own localities. These counts at least nominally owed their allegiance to one of these three Norman rulers, but such allegiance was usually weak and often ignored. { Matthew, p. 21. } When Roger I, Count of Sicily, died in 1101, his young son, Simon of Hauteville, became Count, with his mother Adelaide del Vasto as regent. Simon died four years later in 1105, at the age of 12. Adelaide continued as regent to her younger son Roger, who was just 9 years old. { Houben, p 24 } [ Reign ] { CE, at the time of Roger II&apos;s coming of age, showing the major states and cities. Numerous smaller city-states, usually under the } { suzerainty or } { vassalage of the larger states, are not shown. The border of the } { Kingdom of Sicily in 1154, at the time of Roger&apos;s death, is shown by a thicker black line encircling most of southern Italy. } [ Rise to power in Sicily ] On the death of his elder brother, Simon of Hauteville, in 1105, Roger inherited the County of Sicily under the regency of his mother, Adelaide del Vasto. During this time the mother was assisted by such notables as Christodulus, the emir of Palermo. In the summer of 1110, he was visited by the Norwegian king Sigurd Jorsalfare on his way to Jerusalem. { Houben, p 26, quoting } { Snorri Sturluson, } { Heimskringla, written in the 1220s } The story suggests that Sigurd gave him the name King of Sicily, 20 years before he actually obtained this title. In 1112, at the age of 16, Roger began his personal rule, being named &quot; now knight, now Count of Sicily and Calabria &quot; in a charter document dated June 12, 1112. In 1117, his mother, who had married Baldwin I of Jerusalem, returned to Sicily, since the Patriarch of Jerusalem had declared the marriage invalid. Roger seems to have felt the slight, and this might explain his later reluctance to go crusading. { Houben, 29, quoting } { William of Tyre, } { Chronicon xi.29 } Roger married his first wife, Elvira, daughter of Alfonso VI of Castile and his fourth queen, Isabella, who may be identical to his former concubine, the converted Moor, Zaida, baptised Isabella. In 1122, William II, the Duke of Apulia and Roger&apos;s first cousin once removed, offered to renounce his remaining claims to Sicily as well as part of Calabria. Roger, in exchange, crossed the Straits of Messina to subjugate the duke&apos;s vassal, Count Jordan of Ariano. In doing so, he penetrated the Basilicata and took Montescaglioso. [ Rise to power in southern Italy ] When William II of Apulia died childless in July 1127, Roger claimed all Hauteville family possessions in the peninsula as well as the overlordship of the Principality of Capua, which had been nominally given to Apulia almost thirty years earlier. However, the union of Sicily and Apulia was resisted by Pope Honorius II and by the subjects of the duchy itself. [ Royal investiture ] { Hegira date of 528 (1133 –34). } The popes had long been suspicious of the growth of Norman power in southern Italy and at Capua in December, the pope preached a crusade against Roger, setting Robert II of Capua and Ranulf II of Alife (his own brother-in-law) against him. After this coalition failed, in August 1128 Honorius invested Roger at Benevento as Duke of Apulia. The baronial resistance, which was backed by Naples, Bari, Salerno, and other cities whose aim was civic freedom, gave way. In September 1129 Roger was generally recognized as duke of Apulia by Sergius VII of Naples, Robert of Capua, and the rest. He began at once to enforce order in the duchy, where the ducal power had long been fading. Upon the death of Pope Honorius in February 1130 there were two claimants to the papal throne. Roger supported Antipope Anacletus II against Innocent II. The reward was a crown, and, on 27 September 1130, Anacletus&apos; papal bull made Roger king of Sicily. He was crowned in Palermo on the Christmas Day 1130. Roger II&apos;s elaborate royal mantle bears the date 528 of the Islamic calendar (1133-34 A.D.), therefore it could not be used for his coronation. { Rotraud Bauer: Der Mantel Rogers II. und die siculo-normannischen Gewänder aus den königlichen Hofwerkstätten in Palermo. In: Hg. Wilfried Seipel.: Nobiles Officinae. Die königlichen Hofwerkstätten zu Palermo zur Zeit der Normannen und Staufer im 12. und 13. Jahrhundert. Milano 2004, ISBN 3-85497-076-5, pp. 115–123. } { Rotraud Bauer: Zur Geschichte der sizilischen Gewänder, später Krönungsgewänder der Könige und Kaiser des Heiligen Römischen Reiches. In: Wilfried Seipel (Hg.): Nobiles Officinae. Die königlichen Hofwerkstätten zu Palermo zur Zeit der Normannen und Staufer im 12. und 13. Jahrhundert. Milano 2004, ISBN 3-85497-076-5. pp. 85–95 } It was later used as coronation cloak by the Holy Roman Emperors and is now in the Imperial Treasury (Schatzkammer) in Vienna. [ Peninsular rebellions ] This plunged Roger into a ten-year war. The famous Bernard of Clairvaux, Innocent&apos;s champion, organized a coalition against Anacletus and his &quot; half-heathen king. &quot; He was joined by Louis VI of France, Henry I of England, and the Lothair III, Holy Roman Emperor. Meanwhile southern Italy revolted. In 1130, the Duchy of Amalfi revolted and in 1131, Roger sent John of Palermo across the Strait of Messina to join up with a royal troop from Apulia and Calabria and march on Amalfi by land while George of Antioch blockaded the town by sea and set up a base on Capri. { Houben, 60. Norwich, 11. } Amalfi soon capitulated. In 1132, Roger sent Robert II of Capua and Ranulf II of Alife to Rome in a show of force in support of Anacletus. While they were away, Roger&apos;s half-sister Matilda, the wife of Ranulf, fled to Roger claiming abuse. Simultaneously, Roger annexed Ranulf&apos;s brother&apos;s County of Avellino. Ranulf demanded the restitution of both wife and countship. Both were denied, and Ranulf left Rome against orders, with Robert following. { Petrus de Ebulo, 1196. } First Roger dealt with a rebellion in Apulia, where he defeated and deposed Grimoald, Prince of Bari, replacing him with his second son Tancred. Meanwhile, Robert and Ranulf took papal Benevento. Roger went to meet them but was defeated at the Battle of Nocera on 25 July 1132. Roger retreated to Salerno. The next year, Lothair III came down to Rome for his imperial coronation. The rebel leaders met with him there, but they were refused help because Lothair&apos;s force was too small. { Houben, p. 63. } With the emperor&apos;s departure, divisions in his opponents&apos; ranks allowed Roger to reverse his fortunes. By July 1134, Roger&apos;s troops had forced Ranulf, Sergius, and the other ringleaders to submit. Robert was expelled from Capua and Roger installed his third son, Alfonso of Hauteville as Prince of Capua. Roger II&apos;s eldest son Roger was given the title of Duke of Apulia. Meanwhile, Lothair&apos;s contemplated attack upon Roger had gained the backing of Pisa, Genoa, and the Byzantine emperor, each of whom feared the growth of a powerful Norman kingdom. A Pisan fleet led by the exiled prince of Capua laid anchor in Naples (1135). Ranulf joined Robert and Sergius there, encouraged by news coming from Sicily that Roger was fatally ill or even already dead. The important fortress of Aversa, among others, passed to the rebels, and only Capua resisted under the royal chancellor, Guarin. On June 5, however, Roger disembarked in Salerno, much to the surprise of the whole mainland provinces. The royal army, split in several forces, easily conquered Aversa and even Alife, the base of the natural rebel leader, Ranulf. Most of the rebels took refuge in Naples, which was besieged in July, but despite the poor health conditions within the city, Roger was not able to take it, and returned to Messina late in the year. [ Imperial invasion ] { Tabula Rogeriana, an } { ancient world map drawn by } { Muhammad al-Idrisi for Roger II of Sicily in 1154. Note that the north is at the bottom, and so the map appears &quot; upside down &quot; compared to modern } { cartographic conventions. } In 1136, the long-awaited imperial army, led by Lothair and the duke of Bavaria, Henry the Proud, descended the peninsula to support the three rebels. Henry, Robert, and Ranulf took a large contingent of troops to besiege the peninsular capital of the kingdom, Salerno. Roger remained in Sicily, leaving its mainland garrisons helpless under the chancellor Robert of Selby, while even the Byzantine emperor John II Comnenus sent subsidies to Lothair. Salerno surrendered, and the large army of Germans and Normans marched to the very south of Apulia. There, in June 1137, Lothair besieged and took Bari. At San Severino, after the victorious campaign, he and the pope jointly invested Ranulf as duke of Apulia (August 1137), and the emperor then retired to Germany. Roger, freed from the utmost danger, immediately disembarked in Calabria, at Tropea, with 400 knights and other troops, probably mostly Muslims. After having been welcomed by the Salernitans, he recovered ground in Campania, sacking Pozzuoli, Alife, Capua, and Avellino. Sergius, terrified, was forced to acknowledge him as overlord of Naples and sway his allegiance to Anacletus: that moment marked the fall of an independent Neapolitan duchy, and thereafter the ancient city was fully integrated into the Norman realm. Thence Roger moved to Benevento and northern Apulia, where Duke Ranulf, although steadily losing his bases of power, had some German troops plus some 1,500 knight from the cities of Melfi, Trani, Troia, and Bari, who were &quot; ready to die instead to lead a miserable life. &quot; On 30 October 1137, at the Battle of Rignano (next to Monte Gargano ), the younger Roger and his father, with Sergius of Naples, met the defensive army of Duke Ranulf. It was the greatest defeat of Roger II&apos;s career. His son fought with courage, and Sergius died honourably in battle, but Roger himself fled the field to Salerno. It capped the meteoric career of Ranulf: twice victor over Roger. Anacletus II died in January 1138, but Innocent II refused to reconcile with the King. In Spring 1138, the royal army invaded the Principality of Capua, with the precise intent of avoiding a pitched battle and of dispersing Ranulf&apos;s army with a series of marches along sharp terrain. While the count of Alife lacked decision, Roger, now supported by Benevento, destroyed all the rebels&apos; castles in the region, capturing an immense booty. Ranulf himself, who had taken refuge in Troia, his capital, was killed by a malaric fever on 30 April 1139. Later, Roger exhumed him from the Troian cathedral in which he was buried and threw him in a ditch, only to later repent and rebury him decently. At this time, Sergius being dead, Alfonso was elected in his place and together with his brother Roger, went off to conquer the Abruzzi. { Scyphate Ducalis. Dated year 10 (1140), after the king&apos;s victory on July 25. Obverse: Christ. Reverse: King Roger and Duke Roger. } [ Consolidation of kingship ] After the death of Anacletus in January 1138, Roger had sought the confirmation of his title from Innocent. However, the pope wanted an independent Principality of Capua as a buffer state between the Kingdom of Sicily and the Papal States, something Roger would not accept. { Houben et al., p.71 } In the summer of 1139, Innocent II invaded the kingdom with a large army, but was ambushed at Galluccio on (22 July 1139), { Encyclopædia Britannica, 1911. } southeast of present-day Cassino, by Roger&apos;s son and was captured. Three days later, by the Treaty of Mignano, the pope proclaimed Roger II as rex Siciliae ducatus Apuliae et principatus Capuae. The boundaries of his regno were only later fixed by a truce with the pope in October 1144. These lands were for the next seven centuries to constitute the kingdoms of Naples and Sicily. In 1139, Bari, where during the wars of the past year 50,000 inhabitants had remained unscathed behind the massive walls, decided to surrender: the excellentissimus princeps Jaquintus, who had led the rebellion of the city, was hanged together with many of his followers, but the city avoided a sack. His execution of the prince and his counsellors was perhaps the most violent act of Roger&apos;s life. While his sons overcame pockets of resistance on the mainland, on 5 November 1139 Roger returned to Palermo to plan a great act of legislation: the Assizes of Ariano an attempt to establish his dominions in southern Italy as a coherent state. He returned to check up on his sons&apos; progress in 1140 and then went to Ariano, a town central to the peninsular possessions (and a centre of rebellion under his predecessors). There he promulgated the great law regulating all Sicilian affairs. It invested the king and his bureaucracy with absolute powers and reduced the authority of the often rebellious vassals. While there, centralising his kingdom, Roger declared a new standard coinage, named after the duchy of Apulia: the ducat. [ Economy ] Roger’s reforms in laws and administration not only aimed to strengthen his rule but also to improve the economic standing of Sicily and Southern Italy. He was “very concerned to gain money, but hardly very prodigal in expending it. &quot; { Houben p 159 } In 1140 at his assembly at Ariano he introduced new coinage to make it easier to trade with the rest of the Mediterranean, as there were smaller denominations of the previous coins, to allow more accurate and efficient trading. However, although this new coinage made long distance trade easier it was very detrimental to local trade which spread “hatred throughout Italy.” By the 1150s most of this coinage was no longer in use and soon after, it disappeared all together. Nevertheless, the controversy over the coinage did not hinder the Kingdom’s prosperity. Roger II had not only acquired large wealth through his royal patrimony but also through his military campaigns and their financial rewards. For example gold and silver were gained through the campaigns in Apulia in 1133 and Greece in 1147. { Houben p 161 } Sicily&apos;s geographic location put it at the centre of Mediterranean and thus made it a brilliant location for trade with Europe, North Africa and the Middle East. Its primary export was durum wheat, and as well as other foods like cheese and vine fruits. Unlike other states, Sicily also had a strong political and military standing so its merchants were supported and to some extent protected. { Houben p 164 } This standing allowed for an increase internal trade and a stronger market which led to noticeable developments in agriculture. { Houben p 163 } [ Later reign ] [ Arab-Norman culture ] { Cappella Palatina, at Palermo, the most wonderful of Roger&apos;s churches, with } { Norman doors, } { Saracenic arches, } { Byzantine dome, and roof adorned with } { Arabic scripts, is perhaps the most striking product of the brilliant and mixed civilization over which the grandson of the Norman Trancred ruled &quot; (from } { 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica ). } Roger had now become one of the greatest kings in Europe. At Palermo, Roger drew round him distinguished men of various races, such as the famous Arab geographer Muhammad al-Idrisi and the Greek historian Nilus Doxopatrius. The king welcomed the learned, and he practised toleration towards the several creeds, races and languages of his realm. To administer his domain he hired many Greeks and Arab s, who were trained in long-established traditions of centralized government. { Maurice Keen, Pelican History of Medieval Europe, Routledge Kegan &amp; Paul 1968 } He was served by men of nationality as dissimilar as the Englishman Thomas Brun, a kaid of the Curia, and, in the fleet, first by Christodulus and then George of Antioch, whom he made in 1132 ammiratus ammiratorum or &quot; Emir of Emirs &quot;, in effect prime vizier. (This title later became the English word admiral ). Roger made Sicily the leading maritime power in the Mediterranean. The &quot; Kingdom of Africa &quot; (&apos;&apos;Regno d&apos;Africa&apos;&apos;) pinpointed in red of Roger II A powerful fleet was built up under several admirals, or &quot; emirs &quot;, of whom the greatest was George, formerly in the service of the Muslim prince of Mahdia. Mainly thanks to him, a series of conquests were made on the African coast (1146 –1153). From 1135 Roger II started to conquest the coast of Tunisia and enlarge his dominions: Tripoli was captured in 1146 and Cape Bona in 1148. But these conquests were lost in the reign of Roger&apos;s successor William and never formed an integral part of the kingdom in southern Italy. The Second Crusade (1147 –1148) offered Roger an opportunity to revive the attacks against the Byzantine Empire, the traditional Norman enemy to the East. It also afforded him an opportunity, through the agency of Theodwin, a cardinal ever-vigilant for Crusade supporters, to strike up a correspondence with Conrad III of Germany in an effort to break his alliance with Manuel I Comnenus. Roger never went himself on an expedition against Byzantium, handing over the command to the skillful George. In 1147, George set sail from Otranto with seventy galleys to assault Corfu. According to Nicetas Choniates, the island capitulated thanks to George&apos;s bribes (and the tax burden of the imperial government), welcoming the Normans as their liberators. Leaving a garrison of 1,000 men, George sailed on to the Peloponnesus. He sacked Athens and quickly moved on to the Ionian Islands. He ravaged the coast all along Euboea and the Gulf of Corinth and penetrated as far as Thebes, Greece, where he pillaged the silk factories and carried off the Jewish damask, brocade, and silk weavers, taking them back to Palermo where they formed the basis for the Sicilian silk industry. George capped the expedition with a sack of Corinth, in which the relics of Saint Theodore were stolen, and then returned to Sicily. In 1149, however, Corfu was retaken. George went on a punitive expedition against Constantinople, but could not land and instead defied the Byzantine emperor by firing arrows against the palace windows. Yet the attack on the empire had no enduring results. The king died at Palermo on 26 February 1154, and was buried in the Cathedral of Palermo. He was succeeded by his fourth son William. Roger is the subject of King Roger, a 1926 opera by Polish composer Karol Szymanowski. [ Ancestors ] Roger was the grandson of Tancred of Hauteville and the great great grandson of Hiallt believed to be the name of a Norseman (Viking) who settled in Normandy, in the 10th century. { Hill, James S. The place-names of Somerset. St. Stephen&apos;s printing works, 1914, Princeton University. Page 256 } { Revue de l&apos;Avranchin et du pays de Granville, Volume 31, Issue 174, Parts 3-4. Société d&apos;archéologie, de littérature, sciences et arts d&apos;Avranches, Mortain, Granville. the University of Michigan. } { Google books, The British Chronicles, Volume 2 By David Hughes, Page 527 } [ Family ] Roger&apos;s tomb in the Cathedral of Palermo. Roger&apos;s first marriage was in 1117 to Elvira of Castile, a daughter of King Alfonso VI of Castile. When she died, rumors flew that Roger had died as well, as his grief had made him a recluse. { Houben, 65. } They had six children: Roger (b. 1118 – d. 12 May 1148), heir, Duke of Apulia (from 1135), possibly also Count of Lecce; Tancred (b. 1119 – d. 1138), Prince of Bari (from 1135). Alfonso (b. 1120/1121 – d. 10 October 1144), Prince of Capua (from 1135) and Duke of Naples; A daughter (d. young, 1135); SICILY William (b. 1131 – d. 7 May 1166), his successor, Duke of Apulia (from 1148); Henry (b. 1135 – d. young). Roger&apos;s second marriage was in 1149 to Sibylla of Burgundy, daughter of Hugh II, Duke of Burgundy. They had two children: Henry (b. 29 August 1149 – d. young); Stillborn child (16 September 1150). Roger&apos;s third marriage was in 1151 to Beatrice of Rethel, a grandniece of King Baldwin II of Jerusalem. They had one daughter: Constance (b. posthumously, 2 November 1154 – d. 28 November 1198), who married with the Emperor Henry VI, later King of Sicily in his right. Roger also had five known illegitimate children: —By a daughter of Hugues I, Count of Molise: { According to sources, she could be Roger&apos;s wife, and the marriage could took place in 1141, before the known second marriage of the King. NEAPOLITAN NOBILITY } Simon, who became Prince of Taranto in 1144. —With unknown mistresses: A daughter, wife of the napolitan noblemen Adam; A daughter, married Hugues II, Count of Molise; Adelisa (d. aft. 1184/87) married firstly Joscelin, Count of Loreto, and secondly Robert of Bassonville, Count of Loritello; Marina, married the great admiral Margaritus of Brindisi. [ University ] The Roger II University ( Studiorum Universitas Ruggero II ), a free independent university incorporated in the State of Florida and operating in Italy, was named for this monarch. { http://www.normanacademy.it/RugIIUni.htm } [ Notes ] [ References ] [ Roger II of Sicily ] Alexander of Telese, The Deeds of Roger. Aubé, Pierre. Roger II de Sicile. 2001. Barber, Malcolm. The Two Cities: Medieval Europe, 1050-1320, Routledge, London, second edition 2004, chapter 9, The Kingdom of Sicily Hamel, Pasquale L&apos;invenzione del regno, dalla conquista normanna alla fondazione del Regnum Siciliae (1061/1154) (Palermo, 2009) Holmes, George, The Oxford IllustratedHistory of Medieval Europe. OUP, 1988. Houben, Hubert (translated by Graham A. Loud and Diane Milburn). Roger II of Sicily: Ruler between East and West. Cambridge University Press, 2002. Matthew, Donald. The Norman Kingdom of Sicily (Cambridge Medieval Textbooks), 1992. Alex Metcalfe &apos;&apos;The Muslims of Medieval Italy&apos;&apos; (Edinburgh, 2009) Francois Neveux. The Normans, Constable &amp; Robinson, London, 2008 (translated by Howard Curtis). Norwich, John Julius. The Normans in the South 1016-1130. Longmans: London, 1967. Norwich, John Julius. The Kingdom in the Sun 1130-1194. Longman: London, 1970. Rowe, John Gordon. &quot; The Papacy and the Greeks (1122-1153) (Part II). &quot; Church History, Vol. 28, No. 3. (Sep., 1959), pp 310–327. Wieruszowski, Helen. &quot; Roger II of Sicily, Rex-Tyrannus, In Twelfth-Century Political Thought. &quot; Speculum, Vol. 38, No. 1. (Jan., 1963), pp 46–78. [ External links ] Adrian Fletcher’s Paradoxplace – Palermo and the First Normans – Photos &apos;&apos; Al-Idrisi And Roger’s Book &apos;&apos;, written by Frances Carney Gies. [ Simon ] [ Count of Sicily 1105–1130 ] [ 2 Himself as King of Sicily ] [ William II ] [ Duke of Apulia 1127–1130 ] [ King of Sicily Himself as Count of Sicily William I 1130–1154 ] [ Prince of Taranto Bohemond II Tancred 1128–1132 ] [ Roger II of Sicily Ruggero II di Sicilia (Italian) King of Sicily (1130-1154) 22 December 1095 Mileto 26 February 1154 Palermo ] Category:Roman Catholic monarchs Category:Italo-Normans Category:Kings of Sicily Category:Monarchs of Sicily Category:Medieval child rulers Category:1095 births Category:1154 deaths Category:Burials at Palermo Cathedral Category:Christians of the Norwegian Crusade Category:Christians of the Second Crusade [ ru ] ar:روجر الثاني ملك صقلية an:Rocher II de Secilia br:Ruggero II ca:Roger II de Sicília cs:Roger II. Sicilský da:Roger 2. af Sicilien de:Roger II. (Sizilien) et:Roger II es:Rogelio II de Sicilia fr:Roger II de Sicile ko:루지에로 2세 id:Ruggeru II dari Sisilia it:Ruggero II di Sicilia he:רוג&apos;רו השני, מלך סיציליה kk:Рожер II hu:II. Roger szicíliai király nl:Rogier II van Sicilië ja:ルッジェーロ2世 nap:Ruggiero II &apos;e Sicilia no:Roger II av Sicilia pl:Roger II pt:Rogério II da Sicília ru:Рожер II scn:Ruggeru II di Sicilia sl:Rogerij II. sr:Руђер II Сицилијански fi:Roger II sv:Roger II av Sicilien