[ Cappadocian Cappadocia (disambiguation) and Cappadocian (disambiguation) ] {| class= &quot; toccolours &quot; border= &quot; 1 &quot; cellpadding= &quot; 2 &quot; cellspacing= &quot; 2 &quot; style= &quot; float: right; margin: 0 0 1em 1em; width: 250px; border-collapse: collapse; font-size: 95%; &quot; |-| colspan= &quot; 2 &quot; style= &quot; margin-left: inherit; background:#DEB887; text-align:center; font-size: medium; &quot; |Ancient Region of Anatolia Cappadocia|- align= &quot; center &quot; | colspan= &quot; 2 &quot; | Location of Cappadocia in Anatolia |- style= &quot; vertical-align: top; &quot; { |} } [ Göreme National Park and the Rock Sites of Cappadocia Turkey Mixed i, iii, v, vii 357 Europe and North America 1985 9th http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/357 ] Cappadocia ( [ icon k æ p ə ˈ d oʊ ʃ ə ]; also Capadocia; Turkish Kapadokya, from Greek : Καππαδοκία / Kappadokía, [ کاپادوکیه ] Kāpādōkiyeh) is a historical region in Central Anatolia, largely in Nevşehir Province. In the time of Herodotus, the Cappadocians were reported as occupying the whole region from Mount Taurus to the vicinity of the Euxine ( Black Sea ). Cappadocia, in this sense, was bounded in the south by the chain of the Taurus Mountains that separate it from Cilicia, to the east by the upper Euphrates and the Armenian Highland, to the north by Pontus, and to the west by Lycaonia and eastern Galatia. { Van Dam, R. Kingdom of Snow: Roman rule and Greek culture in Cappadocia. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2002, p.13. } The name was traditionally used in Christian sources throughout history and is still widely used as an international tourism concept to define a region of exceptional natural wonders, in particular characterized by fairy chimney s and a unique historical and cultural heritage. The term, as used in tourism, roughly corresponds to present-day Nevşehir Province. In pre-Hellenistic times, Persians, Assyrians, Greeks and Hittites all lived in Cappodocia. All of these groups were Hellenised in the era of the Greek city-states. In the Middle Ages, Turkish tribes arrived. These Turks are the majority ethnic group in Cappadocia today. [ Etymology ] The earliest record of the name of Cappadocia dates from the late 6th century BC, when it appears in the trilingual inscriptions of two early Achaemenid kings, Darius  I and Xerxes, as one of the countries ( Old Persian dahyu-) of the Persian Empire. In these lists of countries, the Old Persian name is Katpatuka, which is of uncertain origin: the name could be genuine Old Persian, meaning either &quot; land of the Ducha/Tucha &quot; or &quot; land of the beautiful horses &quot; (consistent with the fact that ancient Cappadocia was famous for its horse breeding); according to another theory, it is a Persianized form of the Hittite name for Cilicia, Kizzuwatna. { L. Summerer, &quot; Amisos - eine Griechische Polis im Land der Leukosyrer &quot;, in: M. Faudot et al. (eds.), Pont-Euxin et polis. Actes du Xe Symposium de Vani (2005), 129-166, esp. 135 (with references). } The Elamite and Akkadian language versions of the inscriptions contain a similar name from Akkadian katpa &quot; side &quot; (cf. Heb katef) and a chief or ancestor&apos;s name, Tuka. { Room, Adrian. (1997). Placenames of the World. London: MacFarland and Company. } Herodotus tells us that the name of the Cappadocians was applied to them by the Persia ns, while they were termed by the Greeks as &quot; Syrians &quot; or &quot; White Syrians &quot; (Leucosyri). One of the Cappadocian tribes he mentions is the Moschoi, associated by Flavius Josephus with the biblical figure Meshech, son of Japheth : &quot; and the Mosocheni were founded by Mosoch; now they are Cappadocians &quot;. AotJ I:6. Also see Ketubot 13:11 in the Mishna. Cappadocia is also mentioned in the biblical account given in the book of [ Acts 2:9 ! ]. The Cappadocians were named as one group hearing the Gospel account from Galileans in their own language on the day of Pentecost shortly after the resurrection of Jesus Christ. [ Acts 2:5 ! ] seems to suggest that the Cappadocians in this account were &quot; God-fearing Jews &quot;. See Acts of the Apostles. Under the later kings of the Persian Empire, the Cappadocians were divided into two satrapies, or governments, with one comprising the central and inland portion, to which the name of Cappadocia continued to be applied by Greek geographers, while the other was called Pontus. This division had already come about before the time of Xenophon. As after the fall of the Persian government the two provinces continued to be separate, the distinction was perpetuated, and the name Cappadocia came to be restricted to the inland province (sometimes called Great Cappadocia), which alone will be the focus of this article. The kingdom of Cappadocia was still in existence in the time of Strabo as a nominally independent state. Cilicia was the name given to the district in which Caesarea, the capital of the whole country, was situated. The only two cities of Cappadocia considered by Strabo to deserve that appellation were Caesarea (originally known as Mazaca ) and Tyana, not far from the foot of the Taurus. [ Geography and climate ] { Mt. Erciyes (3916 m), the highest mountain in Cappadocia. } Cappadocia lies in eastern Anatolia, in the center of what is now Turkey. The relief consists of a high plateau over 1000 m in altitude that is pierced by volcanic peaks, with Mount Erciyes (ancient Argaeus) near Kayseri (ancient Caesarea) being the tallest at [ 3916 m ]. The boundaries of historical Cappadocia are vague, particularly towards the west. To the south, the Taurus Mountains form the boundary with Cilicia and separate Cappadocia from the Mediterranean Sea. To the west, Cappadocia is bounded by the historical regions of Lycaonia to the southwest, and Galatia to the northwest. The Black Sea coastal ranges separate Cappadocia from Pontus and the Black Sea, while to the east Cappadocia is bounded by the upper Euphrates, before that river bends to the southeast to flow into Mesopotamia, and the Armenian Highland. This results in an area approximately [ 400 km mi -1 on ] east–west and [ 250 km mi -1 on ] north–south. Due to its inland location and high altitude, Cappadocia has a markedly continental climate, with hot dry summers and cold snowy winters. { Van Dam, R. Kingdom of Snow: Roman rule and Greek culture in Cappadocia. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2002, p.14. } Rainfall is sparse and the region is largely semi-arid. [ History ] [ Cappadocia (satrapy) List of rulers of Cappadocia ] Fairy Chimneys rock formation nearby Göreme, in Cappadocia The town Göreme with rock houses in front of the spectacularly coloured valleys nearby { rock-cut temple in Cappadocia } Cappadocia was known as Hatti in the late Bronze Age, and was the homeland of the Hittite power centred at Hattusa. After the fall of the Hittite Empire, with the decline of the Syro-Cappadocians ( Mushki ) after their defeat by the Lydia n king Croesus in the 6th century, Cappadocia was ruled by a sort of feudal aristocracy, dwelling in strong castles and keeping the peasants in a servile condition, which later made them apt for foreign slavery. It was included in the third Persian satrap y in the division established by Darius, but continued to be governed by rulers of its own, none apparently supreme over the whole country and all more or less tributaries of the Great King. [ Kingdom of Cappadocia ] { hot air balloon over Cappadocia } Fairy chimneys in Cappadocia After bringing the Persian Empire to an end, Alexander the Great tried to rule the area through one of his military commanders. But Ariarathes, a Persian aristocrat, somehow became king of the Cappadocians. Ariarathes  I (332—322  BC) was a successful ruler, and he extended the borders of the Cappadocian Kingdom as far as to the Black Sea. The kingdom of Cappadocia lived in peace until the death of Alexander. The previous empire was then divided into many parts, and Cappadocia fell to Eumenes. His claims were made good in 322  BC by the regent Perdiccas, who crucified Ariarathes; but in the dissensions which brought about Eumenes&apos;s death, the son of Ariarathes recovered his inheritance and left it to a line of successors, who mostly bore the name of the founder of the dynasty. { Münster&apos;s Cosmographia showing &quot; Capadocia &quot; } Under Ariarathes  IV, Cappadocia came into relations with Rome, first as a foe espousing the cause of Antiochus the Great, then as an ally against Perseus of Macedon. The kings henceforward threw in their lot with the Republic as against the Seleucids, to whom they had been from time to time tributary. Ariarathes  V marched with the Roman proconsul Publius Licinius Crassus Dives Mucianus against Aristonicus, a claimant to the throne of Pergamon, and their forces were annihilated (130  BC). The imbroglio which followed his death ultimately led to interference by the rising power of Pontus and the intrigues and wars which ended in the failure of the dynasty. { The coinage of Cappadocian kings was quite extensive and produced by highest standards of the time. See Asia Minor Coins - regal Cappadocian coins } [ Roman and Byzantine province ] [ Cappadocia (Roman province) ] The Cappadocians, supported by Rome against Mithridates VI of Pontus, elected a native lord, Ariobarzanes, to succeed (93  BC); but in the same year Armenian troops under Tigranes the Great entered Cappadocia, dethroned king Ariobarzanes and crowned Gordios as the new client-king of Cappadocia, thus creating a buffer zone against the encroaching Romans. It was not until Rome had deposed the Pontic and Armenian kings that the rule of Ariobarzanes was established (63  BC). In the civil wars Cappadocia was first for Pompey, then for Caesar, then for Antony, and finally, Octavian. The Ariobarzanes dynasty came to an end, a Cappadocian nobleman Archelaus was given the throne, by favour first of Antony and then of Octavian, and maintained tributary independence until AD  17, when the emperor Tiberius, who he had angered, summoned him to Rome and reduced Cappadocia to a Roman province. A house in Cappadocia Cappadocia contains several underground cities (see Kaymaklı Underground City ), largely used by early Christians as hiding places before Christianity became an accepted religion. The underground cities have vast defence networks of traps throughout their many levels. These traps are very creative, including such devices as large round stones to block doors and holes in the ceiling through which the defenders may drop spears. These defense systems were mainly used against the Romans. The tunnel system also was made to have thin corridors for the Roman fighting strategy was to move in groups which was not possible to do in the thin corridors making it easy to pick them off. The Cappadocian Fathers of the 4th century were integral to much of early Christian philosophy. It also produced, among other people, another Patriarch of Constantinople, John of Cappadocia, who held office 517—520. For most of the Byzantine era it remained relatively undisturbed by the conflicts in the area with the Sassanid Empire, but was a vital frontier zone later against the Muslim conquests. From the 7th century, Cappadocia was divided between the Anatolic and Armeniac themes. In the 9th–11th centuries, the region comprised the themes of Charsianon and Cappadocia. Cappadocian Greeks Göreme in winter. Cappadocia shared an always-changing relationship with neighbouring Armenia, by that time a region of the Empire. The Arab historian Abu Al Faraj asserts the following about Armenian settlers in Sivas, during the 10th century: &quot; Sivas, in Cappadocia, was dominated by the Armenians and their numbers became so many that they became vital members of the imperial armies. These Armenians were used as watch-posts in strong fortresses, taken from the Arabs. They distinguished themselves as experienced infantry soldiers in the imperial army and were constantly fighting with outstanding courage and success by the side of the Romans in other words Byzantine &quot;. { Schlumberger, Un Emperor byzantin au X siècle, Paris, Nicéphore Phocas, Paris, 1890, p. 251 } As a result of the Byzantine military campaigns and the Seljuk invasion of Armenia, the Armenians spread into Cappadocia and eastward from Cilicia into the mountainous areas of northern Syria and Mesopotamia, and the Armenian Kingdom of Cilicia was eventually formed. This immigration was increased further after the decline of the local imperial power and the establishment of the Crusader States following the Fourth Crusade. To the crusaders, Cappadocia was &quot; terra Hermeniorum, &quot; the land of the Armenians, due to the large number of Armenians settled there. [ MacEvitt Christopher The Crusades and the Christian World of the East: Rough Tolerance University of Pennsylvania Press 2008 Philadelphia 56 ] [ Turkish Cappadocia ] Following the Battle of Manzikert in 1071, various Turkish clans under the leadership of the Seljuks began settling in Anatolia. With the rise of Turkish power in Anatolia, Cappadocia slowly became a tributary to the Turkish states that were established to the east and to the west, and some of the population converted to Islam. By the end of the early 12th century, Anatolian Seljuks had established their sole dominance over the region. With the decline and the fall of the Konya -based Seljuks in the second half of the 13th century, they were gradually replaced by the Karaman -based Bey lik of Karaman, who themselves were gradually succeeded by the Ottoman Empire over the course of the 15th century. Cappadocia remained part of the Ottoman Empire for the centuries to come, and remains now part of the modern state of Turkey. A fundamental change occurred in between when a new urban center, Nevşehir, was founded in the early 18th century by a grand vizier who was a native of the locality ( Nevşehirli Damat İbrahim Pasha ), to serve as regional capital, a role the city continues to assume to this day. In the meantime many former Cappadocians had shifted to a Turkish dialect (written in Greek alphabet, Karamanlıca ), and where the Greek language was maintained (Sille, villages near Kayseri, Pharasa town and other nearby villages), it became heavily influenced by the surrounding Turkish. This dialect of Greek is known as Cappadocian Greek. Following the 1923 population exchange between Greece and Turkey, the language is now only spoken by a handful of the former population&apos;s descendants in modern Greece. [ Modern tourism ] The area is a popular tourist destination, as it has many areas with unique geological, historic, and cultural features. The region is located southwest of the major city Kayseri, which has airline and railroad (railway) service to Ankara and Istanbul. The most important towns and destinations in Cappadocia are Urgup, Goreme, Ihlara Valley, Selime, Guzelyurt, Uchisar, Avanos, and Zelve. Among the underground cities worth seeing are Derinkuyu, Kaymakli, Gaziemir, and Ozkanak. The best historic mansions and cave houses for tourist stays are in Urgup, Goreme, Guzelyurt, and Uchisar. Hot-air ballooning is very popular in Cappadocia and is available in Goreme. Trekking is enjoyed in Ihlara Valley, Monastery Valley (Guzelyurt), Urgup, and Goreme. Sedimentary rocks formed in lakes and streams and ignimbrite deposits that erupted from ancient volcanoes approximately 9 to [ 3 million ] years ago, during the late Miocene to Pliocene epochs, underlie the Cappadocia region. The rocks of Cappadocia near Göreme eroded into hundreds of spectacular pillars and minaret -like forms. People of the villages at the heart of the Cappadocia Region carved out houses, churches, and monasteries from the soft rocks of volcanic deposits. Göreme became a monastic center in 300—1200  AD. The first period of settlement in Göreme goes back to the Roman period. The Yusuf Koç, Ortahane, Durmus Kadir, and Bezirhane churches in Göreme, and houses and churches carved into rocks in the Uzundere, Bağıldere, and Zemi Valleys all illustrate history and can be seen today. The Göreme Open Air Museum is the most visited site of the monastic communities in Cappadocia (see Churches of Göreme, Turkey ) and is one of the most famous sites in central Turkey. The complex contains more than 30 carved-from-rock churches and chapel s, some having superb fresco es inside, dating from the ninth century to the eleventh century. [ Mesothelioma ] In 1975 a study of three small villages in central Cappadocia—Tuzköy, Karain and Sarıhıdır—found that peritoneal mesothelioma was causing 50% of all deaths. Initially, this was attributed to erionite, a zeolite mineral with similar properties to asbestos, but detailed epidemiological investigation demonstrated that the substance causes the disease mostly in families with a genetic predisposition to mineral fiber carcinogenesis. The studies are being extended to other parts of the region. [ Dogan Umran Mesothelioma in Cappadocian villages Indoor and Built Environment 12 6 367–375 Sage Ankara 2003 10.1177/1420326X03039065 ISSN : 1420-326X 2008-03-04 ] [ Carbone Michelle et al. A mesothelioma epidemic in Cappadocia: scientific developments and unexpected social outcomes Nature Reviews Cancer 7 2 147–54 2007 http://www.nature.com/nrc/journal/v7/n2/abs/nrc2068.html 10.1038/nrc2068 ISSN 1474-175X 2008-03-04 17251920 ] [ Media ] A video showing the terrain of Goreme and Cappadocia The area now sees a lot of movie activity due to its topography. Turkish model and actress Azra Akin recently was in a commercial for a chewing gum called First Ice. The commercial shows some of the area&apos;s features.The 1983 Italian/French/Turkish film Yor, the Hunter from the Future was also filmed in Cappadocia.In Assassin&apos;s Creed: Revelations, Cappadocia is an underground city in Turkey which is dominated by Templars. [ Gallery ] Early Christian cave art with graffiti The town of Ortahisar Places of touristic relevance Rocks Cafe Owner making Turkish flat bread in Goreme. [ See also ] [ Cappadocia ] Cappadocian Fathers Cappadocia under the Achaemenids List Of Colossal Sculpture In Situ List of traditional Greek place names Mokissos Tourism in Turkey Ürgüp Kandovan, Iran [ External links ] [ Cappadocia ] [ Cappadocia ] A recent photo tour of Cappadocia [ References ] [ March 2008 ] Category:World Heritage Sites in Turkey Category:Nevşehir Cappadocia Category:Underground cities Category:Articles containing video clips Category:Places illustrated on Turkish banknotes [ es ] af:Kappadosië ar:قباذق roa-rup:Cappadocia az:Kapadokiya be:Кападокія be-x-old:Кападокія bg:Кападокия br:Kappadokia ca:Capadòcia cv:Каппадоки cs:Kappadokie cy:Cappadocia da:Kappadokien de:Kappadokien et:Kapadookia el:Καππαδοκία es:Capadocia eo:Kapadokio eu:Kapadozia fa:کاپادوکیه fr:Cappadoce gl:Capadocia ko:카파도키아 hy:Կապադովկիա hr:Kapadocija os:Каппадоки is:Kappadókía it:Cappadocia he:קפדוקיה ka:კაპადოკია kk:Каппадокия lv:Kapadokija lt:Kapadokija hu:Kappadókia mk:Кападокија ml:കപ്പഡോക്കിയ nl:Cappadocië ja:カッパドキア no:Kappadokia pl:Kapadocja pnt:Καππαδοκία pt:Capadócia ro:Cappadocia ru:Каппадокия sq:Kapadokia scn:Cappadocia sk:Kapadócia sl:Kapadokija sr:Кападокија sh:Kapadokija fi:Kappadokia sv:Kappadokien th:แคปพาโดเชีย tr:Kapadokya uk:Каппадокія vi:Cappadocia zh:卡帕多细亚