Djibouti is a country in the Horn of Africa. It is the successor to French Somaliland, which was later known as the French Territory of the Afars and Issas. [ Early years ] The history of Djibouti, recorded in poetry and songs of its nomadic people, goes back thousands of years to a time when Djiboutians traded hides and skins for the perfumes and spices of ancient Egypt, India, and China. Through close contacts with the Arabian peninsula for more than one-thousand years, the Somali and Afar ethnic groups in this region became among the first on the African continent to adopt Islam. Djibouti was part of Ottoman Empire in Habesh province between 1855-1884. { http://osmanbey.com/eski_osmanli_topraklari.htm } [ June 2011 ] [ French Somaliland ] [ French Somaliland List of colonial heads of Djibouti (French Somaliland) ] Place Menelik, Djibouti, c1905. It was Rochet d&apos;Hericourt &apos;s exploration into Shoa (1839–42) that marked the beginning of French interest in the Djiboutian coast of the Red Sea. Further exploration by Henri Lambert, French Consular Agent at Aden, and Captain Fleuriot de Langle led to a treaty of friendship and assistance between France and the sultans of Raheita, Tadjoura, and Gobaad, from whom the French purchased the anchorage of Obock in 1862. Growing French interest in the area took place against a backdrop of British activity in Egypt and the opening of the Suez Canal in 1869. Between 1883-87, France signed various treaties with the then ruling Somali and Afar Sultan s, which allowed it to expand the protectorate to include the Gulf of Tadjoura. { Raph Uwechue, Africa year book and who&apos;s who, (Africa Journal Ltd.: 1977), p. 209. } { Hugh Chisholm (ed.), The encyclopædia britannica: a dictionary of arts, sciences, literature and general information, Volume 25, (At the University press: 1911), p. 383. } Léonce Lagarde was subsequently installed as the protectorate&apos;s governor. In 1894, he established a permanent French administration in the city of Djibouti and named the region Côte française des Somalis ( French Somaliland ), a name which continued until 1967. The territory&apos;s border with Ethiopia, marked out in 1897 by France and Emperor Menelik II of Ethiopia, was later reaffirmed by agreements with Emperor Haile Selassie I of Ethiopia in 1945 and 1954. In 1889, a Russian by the name of Nikolay Ivanovitch Achinov { Ashinov, Achinov, Atchinoff or Atchimoff } { Le cosaque Achinoff in Le Progrès Illustré (French daily newspaper), March 1, 1891 } (b. 1856 { Ernest A. Wallis Budge, A history of Ethiopia, Nubia and Abyssinia, Taylor &amp; Francis, 1928. } ), arrived with settlers, infantry and an Orthodox priest to Sagallo on the Gulf of Tadjoura. The French considered the presence of the Russians as a violation of their territorial rights and dispatched two gunboat s. The Russians were bombarded and after some loss of life, surrendered. The colonists were deported to Odessa and the dream of Russian expansion in East Africa came to an end in less than one year. The administrative capital was moved from Obock in 1896. The city of Djibouti, which had a harbor with good access that attracted trade caravans crossing East Africa, became the new administrative capital. The Franco-Ethiopian railway, linking Djibouti to the heart of Ethiopia, began in 1897 and reached Addis Ababa in June 1917, increasing the volume of trade passing through the port. [ World War II ] After the Italian invasion and occupation of Ethiopia in the mid-1930s, constant border skirmishes occurred between French forces in French Somaliland and Italian forces in Italian East Africa. In June 1940, during the early stages of World War II, France fell and the colony was then ruled by the pro- Axis Vichy (French) government. British and Commonwealth forces fought the neighboring Italians during the East African Campaign. In 1941, the Italians were defeated and the Vichy forces in French Somaliland were isolated. The Vichy French administration continued to hold out in the colony for over one year after the Italian collapse. In December 1942, after a British blockade lasting one hundred and one days, Governor Pierre Nouailhetas surrendered French Somaliland. { Time Magazine, Story of a Siege } Free French and Allied forces then occupied the French colony. { Time Magazine, Mighty Invasion } Before the war ended, the colony fell under the Provisional Government of the French Republic. A local battalion from French Somaliland participated in the Liberation of Paris in 1944. [ Referendums ] In 1958, on the eve of neighboring Somalia&apos;s independence in 1960, a referendum was held in Djibouti to decide whether or not to join the Somali Republic or to remain with France. The referendum turned out in favour of a continued association with France, partly due to a combined yes vote by the sizable Afar ethnic group and resident Europeans. { Barrington, Lowell, &apos;&apos;After Independence: Making and Protecting the Nation in Postcolonial and Postcommunist States&apos;&apos;, (University of Michigan Press: 2006), p. 115 ISBN 0472068989 } There was also widespread vote rigging, with the French expelling thousands of Somalis before the referendum reached the polls. { Kevin Shillington, Encyclopedia of African history, (CRC Press: 2005), p. 360 ISBN 1579582451. } The majority of those who voted no were Somalis who were strongly in favour of joining a united Somalia as had been proposed by Mahmoud Harbi, Vice President of the Government Council. Harbi died in a plane crash two years later under mysterious circumstances. { United States Joint Publications Research Service, Translations on Sub-Saharan Africa, Issues 464-492, (1966), p.24. } { Barrington, Lowell, After Independence: Making and Protecting the Nation in Postcolonial and Postcommunist States, (University of Michigan Press: 2006), p.115 } In 1960, with the fall of the ruling Dini administration, Ali Aref Bourhan, a Harbist politician, assumed the seat of Vice President of the Government Council of French Somaliland, representing the UNI party. { Worldstatesmen - DJibouti } { Jacques Foccart et Ali Aref } He would hold that position until 1966. That same year, France rejected the United Nations &apos; recommendation that it should grant French Somaliland independence. In August, an official visit to the territory by then French President, General Charles de Gaulle, was also met with demonstrations and rioting. { A Political Chronology of Africa, (Taylor &amp; Francis), p.132. } { Newsweek, Volume 81, (Newsweek: 1973), p.254. } In response to the protests, de Gaulle ordered another referendum. On 19 March 1967, a second plebiscite was held to determine the fate of the territory. Initial results supported a continued but looser relationship with France. Voting was also divided along ethnic lines, with the resident Somalis generally voting for independence, with the goal of eventual reunion with Somalia, and the Afars largely opting to remain associated with France. However, the referendum was again marred by reports of vote rigging on the part of the French authorities, { American Universities Field Staff, Northeast Africa series, Volume 15, Issue 1, (American Universities Field Staff.: 1968), p.3. } with some 10,000 Somalis deported under the pretext that they did not have valid identity cards. { Jean Strouse, Newsweek, Volume 69, Issues 10-17, (Newsweek: 1967), p.48. } According to official figures, although the territory was at the time inhabited by 58,240 Somali and 48,270 Afar, only 14,689 Somali were allowed to register to vote versus 22,004 Afar. { Africa Research, Ltd, Africa contemporary record: annual survey and documents, Volume 1, (Africana Pub. Co.: 1969), p.264. } Somali representatives also charged that the French had simultaneously imported thousands of Afar nomads from neighboring Ethiopia to further tip the odds in their favor, but the French authorities denied this, suggesting that Afars already greatly outnumbered Somalis on the voting lists. Announcement of the plebiscite results sparked civil unrest, including several deaths. France also increased its military force along the frontier. { Alvin J. Cottrell, Robert Michael Burrell, Georgetown University. Center for Strategic and International Studies, The Indian Ocean: its political, economic, and military importance, (Praeger: 1972), p.166. } [ French Territory of the Afars and Issas ] [ French Territory of the Afars and Issas ] In 1967, shortly after the second referendum was held, the former Côte française des Somalis (French Somaliland) was renamed to Territoire français des Afars et des Issas. This was both in acknowledgement of the large Afar constituency and to downplay the significance of the Somali composition (the Issa being a Somali sub-clan). The French Territory of Afars and Issas also differed from French Somaliland in terms of government structure, as the position of Governor General changed to that of High Commissioner. A nine member council of government was also implemented. With a steadily enlarging Somali population, the likelihood of a third referendum appearing successful had grown even more dim. The prohibitive cost of maintaining the colony, France&apos;s last outpost on the continent, was another factor that compelled observers to doubt that the French would attempt to hold on to the territory. { Newsweek, Volume 81, (Newsweek, inc.: 1973), p.254. } On June 27, 1977, a third vote took place. A landslide 98.8% of the electorate supported disengagement from France, officially marking Djibouti &apos;s independence. { Elections in Djibouti African Elections Database } Hassan Gouled Aptidon, a Somali politician who had campaigned for a yes vote in the referendum of 1958, eventually wound up as the nation&apos;s first president (1977–1999). [ Djibouti Republic ] In 1981, Aptidon turned the country into a one party state by declaring that his party, the Rassemblement Populaire pour le Progrès (RPP) ( People&apos;s Rally for Progress ), was the sole legal one. A civil war broke out in 1991, between the government and a predominantly Afar rebel group, the Front for the Restoration of Unity and Democracy (FRUD). The FRUD signed a peace accord with the government in December 1994, ending the conflict. Two FRUD members were made cabinet members, and in the presidential elections of 1999 the FRUD campaigned in support of the RPP. Aptidon resigned as president 1999, at the age of 83, after being elected to a fifth term in 1997. His successor was his nephew, Ismail Omar Guelleh. On May 12, 2001, President Ismail Omar Guelleh presided over the signing of what is termed the final peace accord officially ending the decade-long civil war between the government and the armed faction of the FRUD, led by Ahmed Dini Ahmed, an Afar nationalist and former Gouled political ally. The peace accord successfully completed the peace process begun on February 7, 2000 in Paris. Ahmed Dini Ahmed represented the FRUD. [ August 2008 ] In the presidential election held April 8, 2005 Ismail Omar Guelleh was re-elected to a second 6-year term at the head of a multi-party coalition that included the FRUD and other major parties. A loose coalition of opposition parties again boycotted the election. Currently, political power is shared by a Somali president and an Afar prime minister, with an Afar career diplomat as Foreign Minister and other cabinet posts roughly divided. However, Issas are predominate in the government, civil service, and the ruling party. That, together with a shortage of non-government employment, has bred resentment and continued political competition between the Issa Somalis and the Afars. In March 2006, Djibouti held its first regional elections and began implementing a decentralization plan. The broad pro-government coalition, including FRUD candidates, again ran unopposed when the government refused to meet opposition preconditions for participation. In the 2008 elections, the opposition Union for a Presidential Majority (UMP) party boycotted the election, leaving all 65 seats to the ruling RPP. Voter turnout figures were disputed. Guelleh was re-elected in the 2011 presidential election. Due to its strategic location at the mouth of the Bab el Mandeb gateway to the Red Sea and the Suez Canal, Djibouti also hosts various foreign military bases. Camp Lemonnier is a United States Naval Expeditionary Base, [ Introduction to MARCENT http://hqinet001.hqmc.usmc.mil/i%26amp%3Bl/v2/LP/LPD/LPD-2%20Personal%20Property/Conferences/9th%20Annual%20SMO%20Conference/MARCENT%20Brief.ppt May 2006 United States Marine Corps February 9, 2007 ] { Microsoft Powerpoint format } situated at Djibouti-Ambouli International Airport and home to the Combined Joint Task Force - Horn of Africa (CJTF-HOA) of the U.S. Africa Command (USAFRICOM). [ Africans Fear Hidden U.S. Agenda in New Approach to Africom http://www.foxnews.com/story/0%2C2933%2C430564%2C00.html Associated Press September 30, 2008 September 30, 2008 ] In 2011, Japan also opened a local naval base staffed by 180 personnel to assist in marine defense. This initiative is expected to generate $30 million in revenue for the Djiboutian government. { http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2011-07-08/japan-opens-military-base-in-djibouti-to-help-combat-piracy.html } [ See also ] Colonial heads of Djibouti (French Somaliland) French Territory of the Afars and the Issas (FTAI) French Somaliland Heads of government of Djibouti History of Africa List of Presidents of Djibouti Politics of Djibouti [ References ] [ External links ] Background Note: Djibouti History of Djbouti History of Djbouti by documents ar:تاريخ جيبوتي ca:Història de Djibouti de:Geschichte Dschibutis es:Historia de Yibuti fr:Histoire de Djibouti hu:Dzsibuti történelme pl:Historia Dżibuti pt:História do Djibouti ru:История Джибути tr:Cibuti tarihi vec:Storia de Gibuti yo:Ìtàn ilẹ̀ Djìbútì