[ August 2008 ] List of battles : before 601 – 601–1400 – 1401–1800 – 1801–1900 – 1901–2000 – 2001–current See also: Battles of the American Civil War [ 1801–12 ] Battle of Aboukir 8 March – British-Turkish army under Sir Ralph Abernathy defeats French Army of Egypt under Jacques de Menou Battle of Copenhagen 2 April – Nelson defeats Danish fleet First Battle of Algeciras 6 July – English naval defeat by French Second Battle of Algeciras 12 July – English naval victory over French, Spanish { 1802 – 20 June – } { First Battle of Sitka. Tlingit warriors massacre Russians and Aleut workers, and carry off the women and children. } { 1803 – } Battle of Delhi 11 September – British forces under Gerard Lake defeat Maratha forces led by French officer Louis Bourquien Battle of Assaye 23 September – English under Wellesley defeat Marathas under Doulut Rao Sindhia in Deccan Battle of Laswari 1 November – Lake defeats Marathas near Agra Battle of Vertières 18 November – Haiti ans defeat French in last battle of war of independence. Battle of Argaon 28 November – Wellesley defeats Sindhia { 1804 – } Battle of Ganja (1804) (22 Novamber 1803-15 January 1804)- Battle between Russian Empire and Persian Empire for the control of Ganja citadel. Battle of Suriname 5 May – Battle between the Netherlands and Great Britain for the control of the Suriname colony. Battle of Tripoli Harbor (October 1803 – September 1804) – Indecisive battle between United States and Barbary Pirates. Second Battle of Sitka – 1 October – 7 October – In reprisal for the 1802 attack, Russian forces defeat the Tlingit in the last major armed conflict between Europeans and Alaska Natives. Battle of Farrukhabad 17 November – Lake defeats Maratha forces of Jaswant Rao Holkar { 1805 – } Battle of Derne (27 April – 13 May) – United States victory during First Barbary War. Battle of Elchingen 14 October – French army, under Marshal Michel Ney, defeats an Austrian army. Battle of Ulm – 16 October – 19 October – Napoleon forces surrender of Austrian army under Baron von Leiberich Battle of Schongrabern – Pyotr Bagration commands Russian and Austrian forces against Murat and Napoleon. Battle of Trafalgar 21 October – Horatio Nelson defeats Villeneuve, signals &quot; England expects every man to do his duty &quot;, Nelson killed Battle of Caldiero 30 October – French forces under Masséna defeat Austrians in Italy under Archduke Charles of Austria Battle of Austerlitz 2 December – French army, under Napoléon Bonaparte, win a great victory against Russian army and any Austrians troops. End of war of third coalition. { 1806 – } Battle of Blaauwberg 8 January – British beat the Dutch near Capetown, this established British rule in South Africa. Massacre of Lauria – 7–8 August – French troops under Massena besiege and destroy Lauria, southern Italy Battles of Jena and Auerstedt – 14 October – French army, under Davout and Napoleon, defeat two Prussian army in separate battles. The city of Berlin was taken by the French troops. Battle of Pułtusk 26 December – indecisive battle between Napoleon and Russians { 1807 – } Battle of Eylau 8 February – Napoleon fights a hard-won bloodbath with Russians, no decisive result. Battle of the Dardanelles 10 May-11 – Ottoman fleet fails to break the Russian blockade of Istanbul Battle of Heilsberg 10 June – Napoleon repulses Russian attack Battle of Friedland 14 June – French army, under Napoleon Bonaparte, decisively defeats Russians under Bennigsen. End of war of fourth coalition. Battle of Athos 19 June – 29 June – Russian fleet under Admiral Seniavin defeats Ottoman fleet in Aegean Second Battle of Copenhagen 2 September-7 – British land, sea forces under Admiral Gambier and Gen. Cathcart capture Danish fleet { 1808 – } Battle of Zealand Point 22 March – Britain defeats Denmark and Norway. Battle of Siikajoki 18 April – Georg Carl von Döbeln halts Russian advance during Finnish War. Battle of Revolax 27 April – Swedish force defeats Russians camped in Finnish town Battle of Pulkkila 2 May – Swedish force annihilates Russian force in Finland Battle of El Bruc (June) – French forces torch buildings after previous attempt foiled by ambush. Battle of Lapua 14 July – Swedish victory during Finnish War. Battle of Medina del Rio Seco 14 July – French victory during Peninsular War. Battle of Bailén 18 July – 22 July – Gen. Dupont surrenders to Spanish rebel forces Battle of Kauhajoki 10 August – von Döbeln defeats the Russians. Siege of Saragossa (15 June – 13 August) – Unsuccessful French attempt to capture Zaragoza, Spain. Battle of Roliça 17 August – British victory during Peninsular War. Battle of Vimeiro 21 August – English, Portuguese forces under Arthur Wellesley defeat French under Junot Battle of Jutas 13 September – Swedes under von Döbeln intercept and defeat Russians. Battle of Oravais 14 September – Russian forces overwhelm Swedish army. Battle of Koljonvirta 27 October – Swedish victory following a month long cease-fire. Battle of Pancorbo 31 October – Indecisive battle between French and Spanish. Battle of Valmaceda 5 November – Minor Spanish victory. Battle of Burgos 7 November – French victory during Peninsular war. Moonlight Raid 10 November – Swedish force under Gen. Sandels engage Russians near Virtabro in middle of night Battle of Espinosa (10 November – 11 November) – French victory, Spanish forces escape. Battle of Tudela 23 November – Marshal Jean Lannes defeats General Francisco Castaños during Peninsular War. Battle of Somosierra 30 November – Napoleon defeats Benito de San Juan. { 1809 – } Battle of Corunna 16 January – French defeat Sir John Moore in Peninsular War Battle of Ciudad-Real 27 March – French forces under General Sabastiani defeat a Spanish army commanded by General Cartojal. First Battle of Porto 28 March – French forces under Marshal Soult capture the city of Oporto from the Portuguese. Battle of Sacile 16 April – French forces under Eugène de Beauharnais defeated in Italy by Austrians under Archduke John Battle of Raszyn 19 April – Duchy of Warsaw defeats Austria. Battle of Abensberg 19 April – 20 April – Napoleon defeats Austrians in Germany under Archduke Charles Battle of Landshut 21 April – Marshal Masséna unable to destroy Austrian left wing under Johann Hiller Battle of Eckmühl 22 April – Napoleon defeats Archduke Charles, forcing him to withdraw from Bavaria Battle of Ratisbon 23 April – Archduke Charles makes good retreat in successful rearguard action Second Battle of Porto 12 May – Wellesley defeats Marshal Soult, drives French from city Battle of Aspern-Essling 21 May-22 – Napoleon &apos;s first attempt to cross Danube near Vienna results in serious check by Austrians under Archduke Charles Battle of Alcañiz 23 May – Spanish defeat French. Battle of Wagram 5 July-6 – French army, under Napoleon, defeats Austrians of Archduke Charles of Austria at great cost, ending war of fifth coalition. Battle of Talavera 27 July – 28 July – Wellesley defeats forces of Gen. Victor, King Joseph Bonaparte in Spain; made Viscount Wellington Battle of Ratan and Sävar 17 August-22 – Gen. Wachtmeister engage Russians near Umeå Battle of Tamames 18 October – Spanish repel Marhsal Ney&apos;s forces. Battle of Ocana 19 November – Spanish forces under Areizago crushed by French forces of King Joseph, Marshal Soult { 1810 – } Battle of Batin 17 August – Russians capture large Ottoman force during the Russo-Turkish War of 1810–1811. Battle of Buçaco (or Busaco) 27 September – Wellington repulses attacks from Masséna, withdraws into Lines of Torres Vedras Battle of Fuengirola 15 October – Polish defeat British and Spanish during Peninsular War. { 1811 – } Battle of the Bridge of Calderón 17 January – Spanish victory against a large Mexican force Battle of Barrosa 5 March – Minor British victory during Peninsular War. Battle of Lissa 13 March – British fleet defeats French fleet. Battle of Anholt 27 March – British naval victory over Denmark and Norway. Battle of Fuentes de Onoro 5 May – Wellington, Masséna fight drawn battle Battle of Albuera 16 May – British under Gen. Beresford defeat Marshal Soult Battle of Tippecanoe 7 November – William Henry Harrison (US) defeats Tecumseh and Shawnee Battle of Tarifa Battle of Yanbu (end of 1811) – Muhammed Ali forces landed in Yanbu starting Ottoman-Saudi War { 1812 – } Battle of Al-Safra January – Muhammed Ali forces met Saudi Al-Kabeer forces near Medina Siege of Ciudad Rodrigo (February 2–23 February) – British and Portuguese forces besiege and defeat French garrison during Peninsular War. Battle of Badajoz (16 March – 6 April) – British and Portuguese forces besiege and defeat French garrison during Peninsular War. Battle of Ostrowo 12 July – Indecisive French victory; Russian strategic success Battle of Lyngør 12 July – British victory, Danish-Norwegian frigate sunk. First Battle of Sackett&apos;s Harbor 19 July – US turns back British naval attack Battle of Salamanca 22 July – Wellington defeats French under Marmont. French evacuate Madrid, but soon return Battle of Klyastitsy (30 July – 1 August) – Minor Russian victory over French corps Battle of Maguaga 9 August – Both armies withdraw from War of 1812 battle. Battle of Fort Dearborn 15 August – Fort burned by Indians Siege of Detroit 15 August – 16 August – American forces, under General William Hull, surrender to British, under Sir Isaac Brock and Chief Tecumseh during War of 1812. Battle of Smolensk 16 August-17 – Russians under Pyotr Bagration, de Tolley defeated and retreat First battle of Polotsk (17 August – 18) – indecisive battle between Russian and French corps Battle of Valutino 19 August – Marginal French victory; successful Russian retreat Siege of Fort Harrison (4 September – 5) – 10 healthy American soldiers repel attack by four tribes. Siege of Fort Wayne (5 September – 12) – Americans repel Miamis and Potawatomis. Battle of Borodino 7 September – Kutuzov retreats after bloody battle. Napoleon enters Moscow. General Pyotr Bagration is killed. Battle of Queenston Heights 13 October – US forces under Rensselaer defeated in attempt to capture town by British under Sir Isaac Brock, who is killed Battle of Tarutino 18 October – Russian victory over Murat&apos;s corps Second Battle of Polotsk (18 October – 20) – Russian victory over Saint-Cyr&apos;s Franco-Bavarian force. Battle of Maloyaroslavets 24 October – Russians under Docturov defeat French, forcing northern retreat Capture of HMS &apos;&apos;Macedonian&apos;&apos; 25 October – Decatur&apos;s USS United States captures HMS Macedonian Battle of Czasniki 31 October – Russians defeat French army, commanded by Marshal Victor. Battle of Aslanduz 31 October – Russians defeat Persian army of Abbas Mirza. Battle of Medina (1812) November – Muhammad Ali of Egypt returned Medina from Saudis Battle of Vyazma 3 November – Russians defeat French indecisively Battle of Smoliani (13 November – 14) – Russian victory over French forces of Victor and Oudinot Battle of Krasnoi 15 November-18 – Partial Russian victory. Napoleon drives off Russian forces attempting to block retreat. Heroism of Marshal Michel Ney First Battle of Lacolle Mills 20 November – British and Mohawks defeat Americans Battle of the Beresina 26 November-29 – French successfully cross river with huge losses, despite being nearly surrounded by two Russian armies, ending retreat from Russia Battle of the Mississinewa (17 December-18) – United States forces defeat Miami tribe.&apos; [ 1813–25 ] Battle of Jeddah 7 January – Tusun Pasha and his father reclaim Jeddah from Saudis Battle of Frenchtown 22 January – British Gen. Proctor defeats Kentucky militia. Battle of Mecca – Tusun Pasha and his father reclaim Mecca. Battle of Ogdensburg 22 February – British victory after attacking against orders. Battle of Mobile 15 April – James Wilkinson captures Spanish Battle of York 27 April – Dearborn and Chauncey capture British garrison, recklessly loot and burn capital (now Toronto) Battle of Lützen 2 May – Napoleon defeats Russo-Prussian army of Wittgenstein Siege of Fort Meigs 1 May – 9 – Effective stalemate during War of 1812. Battle of Bautzen 20 May-21 – Napoleon defeats Wittgenstein, who is only able to escape due to Ney&apos;s incompetence Battle of Fort George 27 May – Lt. Col. Winfield Scott captures British fort Second Battle of Sackett&apos;s Harbor 28 May-29 – US Gen. Jacob Brown turns back British under Sir John Prevost Battle of Boston Harbor 1 June – HMS Shannon captures Lawrence&apos;s USS Chesapeake with ease Battle of Stoney Creek 6 June – British force of 700 under John Vincent defeat US force three times its size under William Winder, John Chandler Battle of Vittoria 21 June – Wellington defeats French under Joseph, forced to withdraw towards France Battle of Craney Island 22 June – British attack on Norfolk foiled. Battle of Sorauren 28 July-1 August – Wellington defeats Soult, who withdraws across Pyrenees Battle of Burnt Corn 27 July – American forces disperse a raiding party of Creek Indians Battle of Fort Stephenson 2 August – British attack on American fort fails. Battle of St. Michaels 10 August – George Cockburn defeated. Battle of Grossbeeren 23 August – Allies win series of three actions during War of the Sixth Coalition. Battle of Katzbach 26 August – von Blucher defeats Marshal MacDonald. Battle of Dresden 26 August-27 – Napoleon&apos;s last major victory on German soil, over main Allied army of Prince Schwarzenberg Battle of Kulm 29 August-30 – Marshal Vandamme defeated, captured by Allied forces Battle of Dennewitz 6 September – Bernadotte, Bülow defeat Ney Battle of Lake Erie 10 September – Perry&apos;s fleet defeats British, Perry says &quot; We have met the enemy and they are ours &quot; Battle of the Thames 5 October – US troops under Harrison defeat British, Indians under Gen. Henry Proctor; Tecumseh killed Battle of Leipzig 16 October-19 October – (Battle of the Nations) Napoleon suffers his greatest defeat ever in the largest battle of the Napoleonic Wars Battle of Chateauguay 25 October – several hundred Canadian militia turn back Wade Hampton&apos;s advance on Montreal; the American army withdraws from Canada Battle of Hanau 30 October-31 – Austro-Bavarian army under Prince Wrede unable to cut off French retreat Battle of Tallushatchee 3 November – US forces under Andrew Jackson defeat Creek Battle of Talladega 9 November – Jackson defeats Creek Battle of Crysler&apos;s Farm 11 November – US forces under James Wilkinson defeated by much smaller British force under J.W. Morrison Battle of Bari { 1814 – } Battles of Emuckfaw and Enotachopo Creek – twin indecisive battles during Creek War. Battle of Brienne 29 January – Napoleon defeats Blücher&apos;s Prussians Battle of La Rothiere 1 February – French under Napoleon manage to hold back an overwhelming force of Prussians until nightfall, where then they withdraw from the field. Battle of Champaubert 10 February – Napoleon defeats Blücher Battle of Montmirail 11 February – Napoleon defeats Blücher Battle of Chateau Thierry 12 February – Napoleon defeats Blücher Battle of Vauchamps 14 February – Napoleon defeats a much smaller force of Russians Battle of Montereau 18 February – Napoleon defeats Schwarzenberg Battle of Bar-sur-Aube 27 February – Schwarzenberg defeats Marshal Macdonald Battle of Orthez 27 February – Wellington defeats French under Soult near Bayonne Battle of Longwoods 4 March – American victory during War of 1812. Battle of Craonne 7 March – Napoleon defeats Blücher Battle of Laon 9 March-10 – Blücher defeats Napoleon Battle of Reims 13 March – Napoleon defeats isolated Prussian corps Battle of Arcis sur Aube 20 March-21 – Schwarzenberg defeats Napoleon Battle of La Fere Chanpenoise 25 March – Schwarzenberg defeats corps of Marmont, Mortier Battle of Horseshoe Bend 27 March – Jackson decisively defeats Creek Battle of Montmartre 30 March – Allied forces enter Paris, force surrender of Marmont, Mortier. Napoleon abdicates soon after; goes to Elba Second Battle of Lacolle Mills 30 March – US forces under Wilkinson defeated by British in attempt to invade Canada via Niagara. Wilkinson relieved, replaced by Jacob Brown, with assistance of Winfield Scott Battle of Toulouse 10 April – Wellington defeats Soult, forced to abandon city. Fighting on southern front comes to end soon after, with news of Napoleon&apos;s abdication Battle of Big Sandy Creek 30 May – US forces surprise the British in Upstate New York, capturing 6 ships and 143 prisoners Battle of Chippawa 5 July – US forces invade Canada under Brown, Scott defeat British under Phineas Riall Battle of Lundy&apos;s Lane 25 July – Brown&apos;s Americans take on British under Sir Gordon Drummond in violent indecisive battle. US forces withdraw from Canada due to heavy losses giving argument for British victory. Battle of Mackinac Island (26 July – 4 August) – Unsuccessful American attempt to capture Fort Mackinac. Battle of Bladensburg 24 August – British forces rout Americans in Maryland, battle witnessed by President Madison. British move on to burn Washington in retribution for the burning of York (Toronto). American government barely escapes the city as Congress and the Whitehouse are torched. Battle of Lake Champlain and Battle of Plattsburgh 11 September – US squadron under Thomas Macdonough defeats British under George Downie. Same day, US land forces under Prevost fight indecisive battle with Americans under Alexander Macomb Battle of North Point 12 September – Land Battle complement of Battle for Ft. McHenry (part of the Battle of Baltimore ). Battle of Ft. McHenry 13 September – Fort protecting Baltimore harbor holds out against British bombardment, inspiring Francis Scott Key &apos;s &quot; Star Spangled Banner &quot; (part of the Battle of Baltimore ). Battle of Cook&apos;s Mills 19 October – Indecisive battle in Canada during War of 1812. Siege of Fort Erie (4 August – 5 November) – Americans repel British attempt to retake fort. Battle of Pensacola (7 November – 9 November) – Andrew Jackson wins pyrrhic victory. { 1815 – } Battle of New Orleans 8 January – Jackson defeats British army of Pakenham, as news of Treaty of Ghent signed in December, not yet arrived Battle of Fort Bowyer 11 February – Jackson loses fort after boasting that ten thousand men could not take it. Battle of Tolentino 2 May – Joachim Murat, King of Naples, declares for Napoleon in Hundred Days, defeated by Austrians, forced to flee kingdom Battle of Quatre Bras 16 June – Ney fights indecisive battle against Wellington Battle of Ligny 16 June – Napoleon defeats Prussians under Blücher Battle of Waterloo 18 June – Emperor Napoleon defeated by Duke of Wellington and Prussians, Dutch and German forces. Battle of Wavre 18 June – Marshal Grouchy, assigned to prevent Blücher from joining Wellington, fights mildly successful battle against Blücher&apos;s rearguard { 1816 – } Bombardment of Algiers – 27 August – UK and Dutch ships attack Barbary pirate s. { 1817 – } Battle of Chacabuco 12 February – Chilean rebels defeat Spanish. Nejd Expedition (1817–1818) – Ibrahim Pasha captured several Nejdi villages Battle of Mahidpur 21 December – British forces under Sir Thomas Hyslop defeat Marathas under Holkar { 1818 – } Second Battle of Cancha Rayada 16 March – Spanish forces defeat Chileans under San Martin. Battle of Maipú 5 April – Chile free from Spain Nejd Expedition – Ibrahim Pasha cuptured Riyadh Battle of Diriyah 9 September – Ibrahim Pasha captured and destroyed Diriyah ending the First Saudi State { 1819 – } Battle of Boyacá 7 August – Known in Colombia as Battle of Boyacá Bridge. (Batalla del puente de Boyacá) Simón Bolívar and his brigadier generals Francisco de Paula Santander and Jose Antonio Anzoátegui defeat and capture royalist Colonel Jose Maria Barreiro in the battle sealing the independence of Nueva Granada, now Colombia. { 1821 – } Battle of Rieti 7 March – Austrian forces defeat Neapolitan rebels against King Ferdinand I Battle of Novara 8 April – Austrian and Sardinian troops defeat Piedmontese revolutionaries Battle of Carabobo 24 June – Simón Bolívar defeats Spanish army, ensuring Venezuela n independence. Battle of Menangkabaoe Part of the first Padri War in the Dutch East Indies. Colonial Dutch forces defeated Indonesian rebels. { 1822 – } Battle of Pichincha 24 May – Sucre defeats Spaniards near Quito Battle of Chios 18 June-19 June – Greek rebel fleet under Constantine Kanaris defeats Ottoman fleet of Kara Ali Battle at Dervenakia 26 July – 28 July – Greek revolutionaries under Theodoros Kolokotronis, Papaflessas and Nikitaras crush Dramali Pasha&apos;s Ottoman army. Battle of Karpenizi 8 August – Greek troops under Marco Bozzaris defeat Ottoman force under Mustai Pasha heading to reinforce Ottoman troops besieging Missolonghi { 1823 – } Battle of Trocadero French army, under Duke of Angoulême, defeat Spanish army and takes Trocadero. Occupation of Spain by French troops (1823 at 1828) { 1825 – } Battle of Danubyu 2 April – British forces under Sir Archibald Campbell defeat Burmese under Maha Bandula, who is killed Battle of Prome 30 November-2 December – Campbell defeats Burmese, led by Maha Nenyo, who is killed [ 1826 to 1850 ] Battle of Monte Santiago – A naval division of the Brazilian Imperial Navy is attacked by Argentine vessels. The battle ended with the destruction of the attacking forces. Battle of Ituzaingó or Passo do Rosário 27 February – A Brazilian Army under Marquis of Barbacena met in combat an Argentine/ Uruguay an Army led by General Carlos Maria Alvear (part of the Cisplatine War ). Battle of Phaleron 24 April – Greek setback in the Greek War of Independence Battle of Navarino 20 October – Joint British, French, Russian fleets, under Admirals Codrington, Rigny, and Heiden, destroy Turko-Egyptian fleet of Tahir Pasha off Greek coast Battle of Kossober October – Ethiopia n warlord Yimam of Yejju joins with Wube Haile Mariam of Semien to defeat Goshu Zewde of Gojjam and Meru of Dembiya. { 1828 – } Battle of Akhalzic 9 August – Russian troops under Paskievich defeat Ottoman troops in Caucasus Battle of Praia Bay 28 August – Miguelite fleet in Portugal defeated by loyalists of Queen Maria in Azores { 1829 } { Battle of Kulevicha 11 June – Russian troops under } { Hans Karl von Diebitsch defeat } { Ottoman Army under Reshid Pasha in Balkans } { 1830 } { Siege of Yogyakarta Part of the } { Java War Fought between Indonesian rebels, and the Dutch colonial army. The Dutch won after 5 years of fighting. } { 1831 – } Battle of Debre Abbay 14 February – Ras Marye of Yejju marches into Tigray and defeats and kills Dejazmach Sabagadis. Battle of Stoczek 14 February – Polish victory during November Uprising. Battle of Białołęka 24 February – Polish counterattack succeeds, forcing Russian attack to be moved up one day. Battle of Olszynka Grochowska 25 February – marginal Polish victory during November Uprising. Battle of Iganie 8 March – Poland defeats Russia. Battle of Ostrołęka 26 May – Russians under Diebitsch fight indecisive battle against Poles of Jan Skrzynecki Ten days campaign 2–12 August – Dutch military victory in the Belgian Revolution. Dutch led by Prince William Battle of Hasselt 8 August – Dutch army defeated Belgian rebels. The Rebels suffered 700 dead while the Dutch losses where very small. Battle of Leuven 12 August – The Dutch army defeated the Belgian rebels and took the city. Battle of Warsaw 6 September-8 – Russians under Paskievich defeat Poles under Dembinski and stamp out revolt { 1832 – } Indian Creek Massacre 20 May – Settlers killed by Indians in Illinois. Battle of the Kellogg&apos;s Grove 16 July – U.S. forces defeat Sauk. Battle of Bad Axe 2 August – Illinois militia massacres Black Hawk&apos;s Saux and Fox Siege of Antwerp 15 November – Dutch troops occupying Antwerp&apos;s citadel (led by David Chassé ) against France&apos;s Armée du Nord. Battle of Konya 21 December – Egyptian forces under Ibrahim Pasha defeat main Ottoman Army of Reshid Pasha in Anatolia Verovering van Bondjol Dutch army successfully beats down an uprise by the people of Sumatra { 1833 } { Battle of Cape St. Vincent 5 July – British fleet under Sir Charles Napier defeats fleet of Portuguese usurper Don Miguel } { 1834 } { Battle of Santarén 16 May – Portuguese forces loyal to Queen Maria II (led by her father, Don Pedro) defeat forces of usurper Don Miguel } { 1835 – } Battle of Gonzales 2 October – Mexicans withdraw during Texas Revolution. Battle of Concepción 28 October – Texans defeat Mexicans under Martin Perfecto de Cós. Grass Fight 26 November – Texans, thinking a Mexican pack train is carrying silver, capture it but only end up with grass. Siege of Bexar (12 October – 11 December) Texans successfully besiege and defeat Mexicans. Dade Battle 25 December 108 American troops were ambushed by about 180 Seminole Indians. Colonel Dade, who was on horseback, was the first to be killed. Only three American purportedly survived the attack. Two of these survivors died shortly after. { 1836 – } Battle of San Patricio 27 February – Texan expedition into Mexico thwarted. Battle of the Alamo (23 February – 6 March) – General Santa Anna defeats Texans. Wm. Travis and Davy Crockett killed in siege. Battle of Refugio (12 March – 15 March) – Infighting amongst Texans leads to defeat. Battle of Coleto 19–20 March – Col. James Fannin and Texans defeated and captured by Mexicans of General Jose de Urrea. Later massacred by Santa Anna. Battle of San Jacinto 21 April – Texans capture Santa Anna Battle of Terapegui 26 April – Spanish constitutionalist forces loyal to Queen Isabella, supported by French Foreign Legion, defeat Carlists near Pamplona { 1837 – } Battle of Huesca 24 March – Constitutionalists win decisive victory over Carlists in Spain Battle of Saint-Denis 23 November – Canadian rebels under Wolfred Nelson defeat British. Battle of St. Charles 25 November – British defeat Canadian rebels. Confrontation at Montgomery&apos;s Tavern 7 December – Battle near tavern first action of Upper Canada Rebellion. Battle of Saint-Eustache 14 December – British capture and ransack village. Battle of Lake Okeechobee 25 December – US forces under Zachary Taylor defeat Seminoles { 1838 – } Battle of Beauharnois 10 November – Revolt in Canada put down. Battle of the Windmill (12 November – 16 November) – British forces defeat Canadian rebels. Battle of Blood River 16 December – Voortrekker force under Andries Pretorius defeat Zulu force under King Dingane in Natal { 1839 } { Battle of Nezib 24 June – Egyptian forces under Ibrahim Pasha defeat Ottoman Army under Hafiz Pasha (assisted by Prussian Captain } { Helmuth von Moltke ) } { 1840 } { Battle of Magango 29 January – Boer forces defeat Zulu King Dingane } { 1841 } { Battle of Canton 24 May – British amphibious assault captures city } { 1842 – } Battle of Debre Tabor 7 February – Ras Ali Alula, Regent of the Emperor of Ethiopia defeats warlord Wube Haile Maryam of Semien. Battle of Kabul 6 January – Afghan forces force British to withdraw from city, which they had occupied for two and a half years { 1843 – } Battle of the Smala 16 May – French forces under Duc d&apos;Aumale defeat Algerians under Abd el Kader Battle of Miani 17 February – British forces under Sir Charles Napier defeat the Baluch forces of the Talpurs in Sind Battle of Hyderabad March – Napier defeats Baluchis in Sind { 1844 } { Battle of Isly 14 August – French forces under Marshal Bugeaud rout Moroccan forces } { 1845 – } Battle of Ohaeawai – British Army attacks Māori Pa, but fortifications too strong Battle of Mudki 18 December – Sikh forces invading British India defeated by force under Sir Hugh Gough Battle of Ferozeshah 21 December-22 – British forces under Gough and Hardinge, Governor-General, defeat Sikhs under Lal Singh in hard-fought battle { 1846 – } Battle of Aliwal 28 January – Sikh forces under Runjoor Singh defeated by British under Sir Harry Smith Battle of Sobraon 10 February – British forces under Gough decisively defeat Sikhs, and Punjab becomes British protectorate Siege of Fort Texas (3 May – 9 May) – Mexican siege on U.S. fort unsuccessful. Battle of Palo Alto 8 May – US Gen. Zachary Taylor defeats Mexicans under Mariano Arista Battle of Resaca de la Palma 9 May – Taylor attacks Arista&apos;s retreating Mexicans Siege of Los Angeles 13 August – US Marines briefly capture Los Angeles, but are driven out by Californio forces, led by José María Flores. Battle of Santa Fe 15 August Kearney occupies Santa Fe Battle of Monterrey (20 September – 24 September) – Mexicans under Pedro de Ampudia defeated by Taylor&apos;s US forces in hard-fought battle Battle of Dominguez Rancho – 9 October José Antonio Carrillo leads Californio forces in victory against 350 US Marines and sailors near Los Angeles. First Battle of Tabasco (24 October – 26 October) – Commodore Matthew C. Perry fights inconclusive battle with Mexicans under Juan B. Traconis. Battle of San Pasqual 6 December – US Cavalry General Stephen Kearny &apos;s dragoons are defeated by Californio forces, led by Andrés Pico near San Diego. { 1847 – } Battle of Rio San Gabriel 8 January – Kearny&apos;s 600 man army defeats the 160 man Californio force near Los Angeles. Battle of La Mesa 9 January – Kearny, Stockton and Fremont&apos;s combined US forces, defeat the Californio &apos;s in the climactic battle for California. Battle of the Sacramento 28 February – US forces under Alexander Doniphan defeat Mexican force near Chihuahua Battle of Buena Vista 22 February-23 – Taylor&apos;s outnumbered men trounce Santa Anna&apos;s Mexicans Battle of Vera Cruz (9 March – 29 March) – Scott takes port city Battle of Cerro Gordo 18 April – Scott defeats Santa Anna Battle of Tuxpan 18 April – Perry defeats Cos. Second Battle of Tabasco (15 June – 16 June) – Commodore Perry captures Battle of Iloha 18 June – Dejazmach Kassa (the future Emperor Tewodros II of Ethiopia ) defeats and captures Empress Menen Liben Amede and her husband, the Emperor Yohannes III. Battle of Contreras 19 August – 20 August – Scott&apos;s forces storm Mexican position defending Mexico City Battle of Churubusco 20 August – Another US force storms other main Mexican position defending capital Battle of Molino del Rey 8 September – Scott defeats Mexican force defending fortification in hard-fought battle Battle of Chapultepec 12 September – Scott takes fortified hill by storm in climactic battle of war Siege of Puebla (14 September – 12 October) – Puebla taken by Winfield Scott. Battle of Huamantla 9 October – U.S. victory, end of Santa Anna&apos;s military career. { 1848 – } Battle of Dabarki March – Dejazmach Kassa assaults an Egyptian fortified camp deep inside of Sudan and suffers massive losses. One of the few defeats experienced by the future Emperor. Battle of Custoza 24 July-25 – Austrian forces under Marshal Radetzky defeat Sardinians under King Charles Albert Battle of Boomplaats 29 August – British forces under Sir Harry Smith defeat Boers under Pretorius in Orange River area Battle of Pákozd 29 September – Hungarian forces defeat Austrian army of Count Jellachich Battle of Schwechat 30 October – Hungary Battle of Ramnagar 22 November – British forces under Gough repulsed by Sikhs under Shere Singh in Punjab Battle of Mór 30 December – Hungary – Alfred I, Prince of Windisch-Grätz defeats a Hungarian detachment under Mór Perczel { 1849 – } Battle of Chilianwala 13 January – British forces under Gough fight another indecisive battle with Sikhs, resulting in Gough&apos;s dismissal Siege of Multan 22 January – British forces capture fortress in Punjab. Battle of Gujarat 21 February – Gough, before getting word of dismissal, crushes Sikhs, Punjab annexed. Battle of Kápolna 26 February-27 – Hungarian forces under Henry Dembinski defeated by Austrians under the Alfred I, Prince of Windisch-Grätz Battle of Novara 23 March – Radetzky defeats Charles Albert, forcing Piedmontese to make peace (Battle of Szolnok) 5 March – Hungarian forces led by general Damjanich defeat Austrian forces. Ten Days of Brescia – 23 March to 1 April – Popular riot against the Austrian garrisons Battle of Isaszeg (or Gödöllö) 6 April – Hungarian forces led by general Görgei defeat Austrians(Windisch-Gratz,Schlick) (Battle of Buda) – May 21 – Hungarians take back the capital from Austrians. Battle of Segesvár 31 July – Hungarian forces under Józef Bem defeated by Russians, Austrians under general Luders and general Dick Battle of Temesvár 9 Aug – Austrian forces under Haynau defeat Hungarians under Artúr Görgey, Bem in final battle of war Battle of Chillanwalla – British defeat Sikhs [ 1851 to 1860 ] Battle of Monte Caseros 3 February – A coalition of the Argentine Provinces of Entre Rios and Corrientes, allied with Brazilian and Uruguayan troops (27,000 men) defeats Buenos Aires forces (22,000 men) under Juan Manuel Rosas, presidente of Argentina. Battle of Gur Amba 27 September – The future Emperor of Ethiopia Tewodros II defeats and kills the vassal of the current ruler of Ethiopia, Ras Ali II. { 1853 – } Battle of Takusa 12 April – The future Emperor of Ethiopia Tewodros II defeats an allied army from the provinces of Tigray, Wollo, Yejju, and Gojjam led by Dejazmach Birru Aligaz of Yejju. Dejazmach Biru is killed. Battle of Ayshal 29 June – The future Emperor of Ethiopia Tewodros II defeats Ras Ali II; considered the end of the Zemene Mesafint ( &quot; Era of Princes &quot; ) in Ethiopia. Battle of Oltenitza 4 November – Russians defeated by Ottoman troops ( Crimean War ) { 1854 – } Battle of Citate 6 January – Ottoman troops defeat Russians during the Crimean War Battle of Alma – British and French, under French general Saint-Arnaud, defeat an Russian army in Crimean War. Battle of Amba Jebelli – The future Emperor of Ethiopia Tewodros II defeats Birru Goshu of Gojjam. Battle of Balaclava 25 October – Charge of the Light Brigade on Crimea under Cardigan Battle of Inkermann 5 November – British, helped by French of general Bosquet, defeat an Russian army. Siege of Sevastopol (17 October–9 September 1855) Allies capture the city. { 1855 – } Battle of Derasge – 9 February – Tewodros II defeats Dejasmach Wube, deposing the last rival warlord of the Zemene Mesafint ( &quot; Era of Princes &quot; ). Battle of Eupatoria – 17 February – Allies win naval battle. Battle of Traktir 16 August – French army and any piedmontese troops defeat an Russian army near the Tchernaïa river. Battle of Malakoff 8 September – French army, under general Pelissier and general Mac-Mahon, takes Malakoff and defeat Russian army. Fall of the city of Sebastopol and end of crimean war. Siege of Kars (June – November) – Russians defeat Ottoman troops. { 1856 – } First Battle of Seattle (1856) – 26 January – Marines from the USS Decatur drive off American Indian attackers after all day battle with settlers. Battle of Santa Rosa 20 March – Costa Rica n troops rout Walker &apos;s soldiers Battle of Rivas 11 April – Central American coalition defeats filibuster William Walker { 1857 – } Siege of Cawnpore June – British troops and civilians besieged and later betrayed and murdered during the Indian Rebellion Battle of Chinhat 30 June – British troops retreat to Lucknow during the Indian Rebellion Battle of Aong 15 July – British forces under General Henry Havelock capture Cawnpore, India. Siege of Lucknow (July – November) – Lucknow besieged by rebels, relieved, besieged again, and relieved for a second time. { 1859 – } Battle of Montebello 20 May – French army, under general Forey, defeat an Austrian army. Battle of Varese 26 May – Piedmontese defeat Austrians in the Austro-Sardinian War. Battle of Palestro 30 May – French zouaves and Piedmontese defeat an Austrian army. Battle of Magenta 4 June – French army, under Louis-Napoleon, defeat Austrian army under general Giulay. Liberation of Milano. Battle of Solferino 24 June – French army and Piedmontese army, under Louis-Napoléon, defeat an Austrian army under archiduc François-Joseph. Started the birth of the Red Cross. End of second war of Italian independence. { 1860 – } Battle of Calatafimi – 15 May – Garibaldi&apos;s victory against Neapolitan troops. Battle of Milazzo – 25 June – Garibaldi&apos;s victory against Neapolitan troops. Battle of Castelfidardo – 18 September – Italian victory over the Papal troops. Battle of the Volturnus 1 October – Sicilians are defeated by the Piedmontese Siege of Gaeta (5 November – 13 February 1861) – Francis II of the Two Sicilies is sieged by the Piedmontese. [ 1861 ] Battle of Fort Sumter 12 April – P.G.T. Beauregard fires on Fort – first important battle of American Civil War Battle of Sewell&apos;s Point (18 May – 19 May) – Union gunboats fight inconclusive battle with Confederate artillery. Battle of Aquia Creek (29 May – 1 June) – Confederate artillery hit by naval bombardment, later withdrawn. Battle of Philippi Races 3 June – Union troops under McClellan defeats rebels Battle of Big Bethel 10 June – Union attack on Confederate positions near a church repelled. Battle of Boonville 17 June – Union forces defeat pro-Confederate governor&apos;s Missouri State Guard. Battle of Hoke&apos;s Run 2 July – Robert Patterson defeats Confederate force but fails to capitalize on his victory. Battle of Carthage 5 July – Confederate victory in Missouri during the American Civil War. Battle of Rich Mountain 11 July – Confederate force split in half mid-battle; one half surrenders, the other escapes. Battle of Blackburn&apos;s Ford 18 July – Irvin McDowell defeated in recon-in-force against Confederate forces at Manassas. Battle of 1st Bull Run, or 1st Manassas 21 July – Union under McDowell lose to Confederates under J.E. Johnston, P.G.T. Beauregard, Jackson anointed Stonewall Battle of Athens – 5 August – Union victory in small skirmish in Northeast Missouri Battle of Wilson&apos;s Creek 10 August – Union forces lose Battle of Kessler&apos;s Cross Lanes 26 August – Confederates surprise and defeat Union forces. Battle of Hatteras Inlet Batteries (28 August – 29 August) – Union forces capture two North Carolina forts. Battle of Dry Wood Creek 2 September – Union cavalry from Kansas defeated by Missouri State Guard. Battle of Carnifex Ferry 10 September – Confederates withdraw by night after several hours of fighting. Battle of Cheat Mountain (12 September – 15 September) – 300 Union troops withstand uncoordinated Confederate attacks. First Battle of Lexington (13 September – 20 September) – Union forces badly defeated by Missouri State Guard. Battle of Liberty 17 September – Minor Missouri State Guard victory. Battle of Greenbrier River 3 October – Confederates withdraw after inconclusive battle. Battle of Santa Rosa Island 9 October – Union forces capture island. Battle of Leesburg 21 October – 1900 Union soldiers die Battle of Fredericktown 21 October – Missouri State Guard defeated. First Battle of Springfield 25 October – Union forces capture town. Battle of Belmont 7 November – Grant captures and destroys Confederate supplies near Cairo, Illinois Battle of Round Mountain 19 November – Confederate forces defeat Opothleyahola near present-day Stillwater. Battle of Chusto-Talasah 9 December – Opothleyahola defeated near present-day Tulsa. Battle of Camp Alleghany 13 December – Confederates withstand Union attack. Battle of Dranesville 20 December – Union defeats Confederate forces under J.E.B. Stuart. Battle of Chustenahlah 26 December – Opothleyahola defeated, flees to Kansas. Battle of Mount Zion Church 28 December – Union victory in Northeastern Missouri. [ 1862 ] { Battle of Malvern Hill } Battle of Cockpit Point 3 January – Inconclusive battle in Virginia during the Civil War. Battle of Hancock – (5 January – 6 January) – Unsuccessful Confederate attack on Maryland town. Battle of Roan&apos;s Tan Yard 8 January – Confederates routed. Battle of Middle Creek 10 January – Union forces under James A. Garfield defeat Confederates under Humphrey Marshall. Battle of Mill Springs 19 January – Union victory, Felix Zollicoffer killed. Battle of Fort Henry 6 February – Ulysses S. Grant and gunboats under Andrew Hull Foote take fort and gain control of Tennessee River Battle of Roanoke Island (7 February – 8 February) – Union forces under Ambrose E. Burnside capture island. Battle of Elizabeth City 10 February – Destruction of the Mosquito Fleet. Battle of Fort Donelson (11 February – 16 February) – Grant takes fort, accepts surrender of Confederate army, and gains control of Cumberland River Battle of Valverde (20 February – 21 February) – Union forces routed in New Mexico Territory. Battle of Pea Ridge 7 March – Missouri saved for Union Battle of Hampton Roads 9 March – Monitor defeats Merrimac Battle of New Bern 14 March – Union troops disembark from ships and capture town. First Battle of Kernstown 23 March – Union forces defeat Confederates under &quot; Stonewall &quot; Jackson. Battle of Glorieta (26 March – 28 March) – Union forces outmaneuver Confederates near Santa Fe. Battle of Shiloh (6 April – 7 April) – Ulysses S. Grant attacked by Albert Sidney Johnston and P.G.T. Beauregard, defeats them Battle of Island Number Ten (28 February – 8 April) – Union victory by Pope Battle of Ft. Pulaski 10 April – 11 April – Union takes fort Battle of Peralta 15 April – Union forces defeat the 5th Texas Mounted Volunteers. Battle of South Mills 19 April – Confederates thwart attempt to destroy a canal. Battle of Fort Macon (23 March – 26 April) Confederate fort surrenders after Union artillery bombardment. Battle of New Orleans (25 April – 1 May) – Union forces capture city. Battle of Yorktown (5 April – 4 May) – Union troops win skirmish near site of decisive Revolutionary War battle. Battle of Puebla 5 May – Cinco de Mayo – Mexicans defeat French Battle of Williamsburg – McClellan and Longstreet fight inconclusive battle. Battle of Eltham&apos;s Landing 7 May – Inconclusive battle in Virginia. Battle of McDowell (8 May – 9 May) – Stonewall Jackson&apos;s Confederates defeat Union forces. Battle of Drewry&apos;s Bluff 15 May – Union naval attack repelled by Confederate artillery. Battle of Whitney&apos;s Lane 19 May – Union campaign towards Little Rock, Arkansas halted Battle of Front Royal 23 May – Stonewall Jackson forces Union retreat by threatening the rear of the Union force. First Battle of Winchester 25 May – Stonewall Jackson defeats Nathaniel P. Banks. Battle of Hanover Courthouse 27 May – Union victory during the American Civil War. Siege of Corinth 29 April – 30 May – Union forces capture town, Beauregard tricks Union in order to escape to Tupelo. Battle of Seven Pines 31 May – J.E. Johnston attacks Union forces, wounded, inconclusive Battle of Tranter&apos;s Creek 5 June – Confederate forces retreat after Colonel Singletary is killed. Battle of Memphis 6 June – Union forces capture the city. First Battle of Chatanooga (7 June – 8 June) – Union forces bombard the town. Battle of Cross Keys 8 June – John C. Fremont defeated by elements of Stonewall Jackson&apos;s force. Battle of Port Republic 9 June – Costly victory for Stonewall Jackson. Battle of Secessionville 16 June – Union fails to take town, Union commander later court-martialed for disobeying orders. Battle of Saint Charles 17 June – The USS Mound City is hit by Confederate shore gun and explodes. Battle of Oak Grove 25 June – Indecisive battle between McClellan and Lee. Battle of Beaver Dam Creek 26 June – Robert E. Lee defeated. Battle of Gaines&apos; Mill 27 June – Lee defeats McClellan. Battle of Garnett&apos;s &amp; Golding&apos;s Farm (27 June – 28 June) – Indecisive battle between Lee and McClellan. Battle of Savage&apos;s Station 29 June – Union forces withdraw Battle of White Oak Swamp 30 June – Indecisive artillery duel during the American Civil War. Battle of Glendale 30 June – McClellan retreats from Lee&apos;s Confederates. Battle of Tampa (30 June – 1 July) – Union gunboat attacks, but later withdraws. Battle of Malvern Hill 1 July – McClellan defeats Lee but withdraws after battle. Battle of Hill&apos;s Plantation 7 July – Union victory in Arkansas. First Battle of Murfreesboro 13 July – Confederate victory during the American Civil War. Battle of Baton Rouge 5 August Battle of Kirksville (6 August – 9 August) – Union forces capture town. Battle of Cedar Mountain 9 August – Union forces repelled by Confederate counter-attack. First Battle of Independence 11 August – Confederate victory near Kansas City. Battle of Lone Jack (15 August – 16 August) – Confederate victory, Union commander killed. Confederates forced to withdraw after battle. Battle of Fort Ridgely (21 August – 22 August) – Failed Santee Sioux attack on Union controlled fort. First Battle of Rappahannock Station (22 August – 25 August) – Union supplies destroyed during skirmish. Battle of Bull Run Bridge – Confederates capture and destroy Manassas Station. Battle of Thoroughfare Gap 28 August – Longstreet defeats small union force. Battle of Aspromonte 29 August – Italian royal forces defeat rebels Battle of 2nd Bull Run, or Second Manassas 30 August – Jackson, Lee, and Longstreet destroys Pope&apos;s Army of Northern Virginia Battle of Richmond (Kentucky) – 30 August – Confederates under Edmund Kirby Smith rout Union army under Gen. William Nelson Battle of Chantilly 1 September – Union forces escape from nearly being cut off, Philip Kearny is killed. Battle of Mile Hill 2 September – Confederates clear Leesburg of Federal forces. Battle of South Mountain 14 September – McClellan defeats Lee. Battle of Harpers Ferry (12 September – 15 September) – Stonewall Jackson captures Union garrison. Battle of Antietam 17 September – McClellan ends Lee&apos;s invasion of North, bloodiest day of war Battle of Munfordville (14 September – 17 September) – Union force surrenders. Battle of Iuka 19 September – Grant is victorious near Mississippi town. Battle of Shepherdstown (19 September – 20 September) – Confederate brigades counterattack and defeat pursuing Union brigades. First Battle of Newtonia 30 September – Union forces panic under bombardment from Confederate artillery. Second Battle of Corinth (3 October – 4 October) – Confederate attack fails. Battle of Hatchie&apos;s Bridge 5 October – Confederate force under Earl Van Dorn escapes across river. Battle of Perryville 8 October – Buell v. Bragg, indecisive Battle of Clark&apos;s Mill 7 November – Union force surrenders to larger Confederate force. Battle of Cane Hill 28 November – Small Confederate force delays Union while larger force escapes. Battle of Prairie Grove 7 December – Union secures NW Arkansas Battle of Hartsville 7 December – Disguised in Union uniforms, Confederates infiltrate and defeat Union forces. Battle of Fredericksburg 13 December – Lee routs Burnside Battle of Kinston 14 December – Union forces under John G. Foster defeat Confederates under Nathan Evans. Battle of White Hall 16 December – Foster fights indecisive battle with Beverly Robertson Battle of Goldsboro Bridge 17 December – Foster defeats Confederates and destroys the bridge. Battle of Jackson, Tennessee 19 December – Confederate feint to distract Union forces. Battle of Chickasaw Bayou (26 December – 29 December) – Union attack on Confederate right flank thwarted. Battle of Parker&apos;s Cross Roads 31 December – Confederates repel Union double-pronged assault. [ 1863 ] Battle of Murfreesboro 31 December 1862 – 2 January 1863 – Forces fight to draw Second Battle of Springfield 8 January – Confederates enter town, but are unable to take nearby fort. Battle of Arkansas Post 9 January – Part of Vicksburg Campaign, fight for control of mouth of Arkansas River Battle of Hartville (9 January – 11 January) – Confederates are victorious, but unable to continue raid. Bear River Massacre 29 January – Shoshone forces massacred by Union troops. Battle of Dover 3 February – Failed Confederate attack on town. Battle of Staszów 17 February – Indecisive battle between Poland and Russia as part of January Uprising Battle of Małogoszcz 24 February – Polish forced to retreat. Battle of Thompson&apos;s Station 5 March – Confederate victory in Tennessee. Battle of Fort Anderson (13 March – 15 March) Daniel H. Hill leads unsuccessful Confederate attack on New Bern. Battle of Kelly&apos;s Ford 17 March – Indecisive cavalry battle during the American Civil War. Battle of Vaught&apos;s Hill 20 March – Union forces withstand attack by John Hunt Morgan &apos;s Confederates. Battle of Brentwood 25 March – Union force surrenders. Battle of Washington (30 March – 19 April) Hill unable to take North Carolina town from Union forces. First Battle of Franklin 10 April – Confederates withdraw after rearguard defeat. Battle of Suffolk (11 April – 4 May) Twin indecisive battles at Norfleet House and Hill&apos;s Point fought over town. Grierson&apos;s Raid 17 April – Deep Union cavalry raid toward Baton Rouge, Louisiana, serves as a diversion of Confederate forces during Grant&apos;s VIcksburg campaign. Battle of Cape Girardeau 26 April – Confederate attack fails. Battle of Grand Gulf 29 April – Unsuccessful naval attack by Grant&apos;s forces. Battle of Snyder&apos;s Bluff 29 April – 1 May Union feint during Vicksburg Campaign. Battle of Day&apos;s Gap 30 April – Union victory during a raid in Alabama. Battle of Camarón 30 April – Regarding by the French Foreign Legion as a defining moment in its history. Battle of Port Gibson 1 May – in Vicksburg campaign, Grant defeats Confederates Battle of Chalk Bluff (1 May – 2 May) – Confederates win but can&apos;t continue raid. Battle of Chancellorsville 2 May – Lee defeats Hooker&apos;s Army of Potomac, Jackson killed Second Battle of Fredericksburg 3 May – Union forces under John Sedgwick defeat Confederate forces left to guard the town by Lee. Battle of Salem Church (3 May – 4 May) – Lee defeats Sedgwick. Battle of Raymond 12 May – Failed Confederate attempt to protect Vicksburg from approaching Federals. Battle of Jackson (MS) 14 May – Sherman, McPherson defeat Johnston Battle of Champion&apos;s Hill 16 May – Grant defeats Confederates Battle of Big Black River Bridge 17 May – Confederate forces trapped in Vicksburg. Battle of Plains Store 21 May – Union victory near Baton Rouge. Battle of Milliken&apos;s Bend 7 June – Confederates unable to break Siege of Vicksburg. Battle of Brandy Station 9 June – Pleasonton surprises Jeb Stuart&apos;s cavalrymen in their camps near Brandy Station Second Battle of Winchester (13 June – 15 June) – Confederate victory paves way for Lee&apos;s invasion. Battle of Aldie 17 June – Indecisive battle during Robert E. Lee&apos;s march north. Battle of Middleburg (17 June – 19 June) – J.E.B. Stuart retreats from engagement with Union cavalry. Battle of Upperville 21 June – Indecisive cavalry battle during Lee&apos;s invasion. Battle of Hoover&apos;s Gap (24 June – 26 June) – Union victory prevents Confederates in Tennessee from coming to the aid of Vicksburg. Battle of Goodrich&apos;s Landing (29 June – 30 June) – Confederates drive Union Black Regiments off of several plantations. Battle of Hanover 30 June – J.E.B. Stuart forced to change his route, delaying his efforts to unite with Lee&apos;s force outside Gettysburg. Battle of Gettysburg (1 July – 3 July) – Lee loses to Meade, Pickett&apos;s Charge fails, ends second invasion of North Battle of Vicksburg 4 July – siege from 22 May ends, Grant accepts surrender of second Confederate army Battle of Helena 4 July – Confederate assault on river port fails securing eastern Arkansas for Union Battle of Boonsboro 8 July – indecisive action at rearguard of Lee&apos;s retreat. Siege of Port Hudson (21 May – 9 July) – last Confederate stronghold on Mississippi surrenders. Battle of Corydon 9 July – Confederate raid results in civilian casualties, including a Lutheran minister. First Assault on Morris Island 11 July – First of two Union attempts to take Ft. Wagner. Battle of Williamsport (6 July – 16 July) – Meade and Lee fight indecisive battle. Battle of Honey Springs 17 July – In Indian Territory, two largely Black and Native American forces meet. Union victory. Battle of Fort Wagner, Morris Island 18 July – second of two Union attempts to take Ft. Wagner fails, heroism of the 54th Massachusetts. Battle of Manassas Gap 23 July – Indecisive battle by day, Confederates withdraw by night. Battle of Big Mound (24 July – 25 July) – Union forces defeat Santee and Teton Sioux forces. Battle of Dead Buffalo Lake 26 July – Sibley defeats Sioux forces. Battle of Salineville 26 July – Confederate Brigadier General John Hunt Morgan surrenders in Ohio: the Northernmost Battle of the American Civil War. Battle of Stony Lake 28 July – Sioux forces escape Union forces in pursuit. Second Battle of Fort Sumter (17 August – 9 September) – Union attempt to retake fort fails even after massive bombardment and naval attack. Second Battle of Chattanooga (21 August – 8 September) – Union captures town. Battle of Lawrence 23 August – Quantrill&apos;s Raiders pillage the city. Battle of Devil&apos;s Backbone 1 September – Union victory after heavy fighting. Battle of Whitestone Hill (3 September – 5 September) – Union forces defeat several Native American tribes including Sioux and Blackfeet. Second Battle of Sabine Pass 8 September – Confederate forces place stakes in river to help aim their guns at Union ships, Confederate victory. Battle of Bayou Fourche 10 September – Union victory allows for capture of Little Rock. Battle of Davis&apos; Cross Roads (10 September – 11 September) – Union forces establish defensive positions prior to Chickamauga. Battle of Chickamauga 19 September – Bragg defeats Rosecrans, George Thomas of US anointed &quot; The Rock of Chickamauga &quot; Battle of Blountville 22 September – Union forces capture town. Battle of Baxter Springs 6 October – Quantrill&apos;s Raiders massacre Union Black Troops during the American Civil War. Battle of Blue Springs 10 October – Confederate forces overrun. First Battle of Auburn 13 October – J.E.B. Stuart escapes by hiding in a ravine. Second Battle of Auburn 14 October – Confederates attack Union rearguard, indecisive. Battle of Bristoe Station 14 October – Meade defeats elements of Lee&apos;s forces, but Confederates destroy railroad during retreat. Battle of Buckland Mills 19 October – Union cavalry caught in ambush, defeated. Battle of Pine Bluff 25 October – Confederate attack fails. Battle of Wauhatchie (28 October – 29 October) Longstreet defeated by Union forces. Battle of Collierville 3 November – Abortive Confederate attack on the town. Second Battle of Rappahannock Station 7 November – Union forces surge across river, forcing Lee to retreat. Battle of Campbell&apos;s Station 16 November – Confederate double-envelopment attempt fails. Third Battle of Chattanooga (23 November – 25 November) – Grant defeats Braxton Bragg and relieves Union forces besieged in Chattanooga Battle of Ringgold Gap 27 November – Confederates under Patrick Cleburne defeat Union forces under Joseph Hooker. Battle of Fort Sanders 29 November – Longstreet unable to take fort due to poor quality gunpowder. Battle of Mine Run (27 November – 2 December) Meade bombards Lee&apos;s Confederates but then withdraws. Battle of Bean&apos;s Station 14 December – Union forces withdraw a short distance. Battle of Mossy Creek 29 December – Confederate cavalry forced back. [ 1864 ] [ Kearsarge 1861 6 ] Battle of Dandridge 17 January – Union forces withdraw Battle of Athens 26 January – Union victory in Northern Alabama. Battle of Fair Garden 27 January – Union pyrrhic victory. Battle of Morton&apos;s Ford (6 February – 7 February) – Diversionary Union attack. Battle of Meridian 14 February – Sherman occupies town Battle of Olustee 20 February – Union can&apos;t take Florida Battle of Paducah 25 March – Confederate raid by Forrest successful. Battle of Elkin&apos;s Ferry (3 April – 4 April) – Confederates unable to prevent Union river crossing. Battle of Mansfield 8 April – Banks Union Red River Campaign halted by rebels Battle of Pleasant Hill 9 April – Confederate attack fails. Battle of Prairie D&apos;Ane (9 April – 13 April) – Frederick Steele defeats Sterling Price. Battle of Fort Pillow 12 April – N.B. Forrest takes fort, massacres black soldiers Battle of Poison Spring 18 April – Part of Red River Campaign in Arkansas, black troops massacred Battle of Dybbøl 18 April – key defeat for Denmark in the Second War of Schleswig Battle of Monett&apos;s Ferry 23 April – Confederate forces driven back. Battle of Marks&apos; Mills 25 April – Part of Red River Campaign in Arkansas Battle of Jenkins&apos; Ferry 30 April – Part of Red River Campaign in Arkansas Battle of the Wilderness 5 May – Grant and Lee meet inconclusively Battle of Albemarle Sound 5 May – Indecisive naval battle during the American Civil War. Battle of Port Walthall Junction (6 May – 7 May) – Union forces destroy railroad Battle of Heligoland 9 May Danish sea victory over Austria. Last significant battle involving wooden ships on both sides. Battle of Cloyd&apos;s Mountain 9 May – Union victory, Confederate General Albert G. Jenkins killed. Battle of Swift Creek 9 May – Union forces damage railroad, but are stopped by Confederate forces. Battle of Cove Mountain 10 May – Union victory after brief battle. Battle of Chester Station 10 May – Union forces under Benjamin Butler pushed back. Battle of Yellow Tavern 11 May – Union forces win cavalry battle, J.E.B. Stuart is killed. Battle of Rocky Face Ridge 8 May – 13 May Indecisive battle near Atlanta. Battle of Resaca 13 May – Sherman defeats Johnston Battle of New Market 15 May – Confederate forces halt Union army under Franz Sigel from advance up Shenandoah Valley Battle of Proctor&apos;s Creek (12 May – 16 May) – Beauregard defeats Butler. Battle of Adairsville 17 May – Failed Confederate attempt to destroy part of the Union force approaching Atlanta. Battle of Ware Bottom Church 20 May – Beauregard boxes Butler in. Battle of Spotsylvania Court House (8 May – 21 May) – Grant and Lee meet inconclusively, Grant writes to Halleck &quot; I propose to fight it out on this line if it takes all summer &quot; Battle of Wilson&apos;s Wharf 24 May – Confederates under Fitzhugh Lee defeated by two Union black regiments. Battle of North Anna (23 May – 26 May) – Lee outmaneuvers Grant, but because of illness, he is unable to capitalize. Battle of New Hope Church (25 May – 26 May) Hooker&apos;s forces defeated. Battle of Pickett&apos;s Mill 27 May – Unsuccessful attack by Sherman on Johnston. Battle of Haw&apos;s Shop 28 May – Union advance halted. Battle of Dallas (Georgia) 28 May – Confederate withdrawal in Georgia. Battle of Totopotomoy Creek (28 May – 30 May) – Union forces pushed back. Battle of Old Church 30 May – Union forces drive Confederates back to Cold Harbor. Battle of Cold Harbor (31 May – 12 June) – Lee repulses Grant, Confederate general says &quot; This is not war, this is murder &quot;. Battle of Piedmont 5 June – Union forces under David Hunter defeat Confederate defenses on march to Staunton, Virginia, upper Shenandoah Valley First Battle of Petersburg 9 June – Beauregard defeats Butler. Battle of Brices Crossroads 10 June – N.B. Forrest routs Union force almost three times as large Battle of Trevilian Station (11 June – 12 June) – Confederate victory, George Armstrong Custer nearly surrounded and has to be rescued by Sheridan. Second Battle of Petersburg (15 June – 18 July) – Lee repulses Grant at back door to Richmond. Battle of Lynchburg 17 June Sinking of CSS &apos;&apos;Alabama&apos;&apos; 19 June – sinks CSS &apos;&apos;Alabama&apos;&apos; Battle of Kolb&apos;s Farm 22 June – Confederate attack fails due to poor terrain conditions. Battle of Jerusalem Plank Road (21 June – 24 June) – Union siege lines extended for Siege of Petersburg. Battle of Saint Mary&apos;s Church 24 June – Union forces fight a successful delaying action. Battle of Kennesaw Mountain 27 June – Johnston repulses Sherman Battle of Als 29 June – Final battle of the Second War of Schleswig, Prussian victory over Denmark. Battle of Marietta (9 June – 3 July) – Sherman defeats Johnston Battle of Monocacy Junction 9 July – Union Gen. Lew Wallace slows up Jubal Early, saving DC Battle of Fort Stevens (11 July – 12 July) – Failed confederate attempt to capture Washington, D.C., President Lincoln, observing the battle, comes under Confederate fire. Battle of Tupelo (14 July – 15 July) – Union victory, Nathan Bedford Forrest wounded. Battle of Cool Spring (17 July – 18 July) Battle of Rutherford&apos;s Farm 20 July – Confederates under Jubal Early caught by surprise and defeated. Battle of Peachtree Creek 20 July – Confederate attack fails Battle of Atlanta 22 July – Sherman turns back Hood Second Battle of Kernstown 24 July – Jubal Early defeats Union forces. Battle of Killdeer Mountain 26 July – Union forces defeat Sioux. Battle of Ezra Church 28 July – Confederates fail to gain element of surprise, finding entrenched Union forces. Union victory. Battle of the Crater 30 July – Lee defeats Burnside Battle of Folck&apos;s Mill 1 August – Indecisive battle during the American Civil War. Battle of Utoy Creek (5 August – 7 August) Indecisive battle on Union right flank near Atlanta. Second Battle of Dalton (14 August – 15 August) – Union forces withstand attack until relieved. Battle of Globe Tavern (18 August – 21 August) – Confederate forces lose control of railroads at Petersburg. Battle of Lovejoy&apos;s Station 20 August – Confederates repel Union raiders attacking the station. Second Battle of Memphis 21 August – Partially successful Confederate raid. Battle of Mobile Bay 23 August – David Farragut takes port, says &quot; Damn the torpedoes, full speed ahead &quot; Second Battle of Ream&apos;s Station 25 August – Union lines overrun by Confederates. Battle of Jonesborough (31 August – 1 September) – William J. Hardee &apos;s Confederates defeated, resulting in Atlanta&apos;s fall. Battle of Shimonoseki 5 September – 6 – engagements since July, 1863 pits U.S. and European allies against rebellious Japanese warlord Third Battle of Winchester 19 September – Sheridan defeats Early, several officers killed or wounded on both sides. Battle of Fisher&apos;s Hill (21 September – 22 September) – Successful Union frontal assault. Battle of Fort Davidson 27 September – Union forces detonate their own fort after losing to Confederates. Battle of Chaffin&apos;s Farm (29 September – 30 September) – Union forces victorious, but fail to capture several forts. Battle of Peebles&apos; Farm (30 September – 2 October) – Union victory near Petersburg. Battle of Saltville (1 October – 3 October) – Confederates defeat Union Black Cavalry, war crimes committed against captured blacks. Battle of Allatoona 5 October – Union fortifications hold. Battle of Darbytown Road 7 October – Confederate attack repelled near Richmond. Battle of Tom&apos;s Brook 9 October – Union cavalry defeats Confederates. Battle of Glasgow 15 October – Union forces surrender. Second Battle of Lexington 19 October – Union forces driven out of town. Battle of Cedar Creek 19 October – Sheridan defeats Early, drives rebels from Shenandoah Valley Battle of Little Blue River 21 October – Confederate victory in Missouri. Second Battle of Independence 22 October – Union forces occupy town. Battle of Byram&apos;s Ford (22 October – 23 October) – Confederates under Marmaduke defeated. Battle of Westport 23 October – Union forces win decisive battle to take control of Missouri. Battle of Marais des Cygnes 25 October – Price&apos;s Confederates pursued into Kansas. Battle of Mine Creek 25 October – Price&apos;s army crushed, flees back into Missouri. Battle of Marmiton River 25 October – Price escapes Union pursuit. Battle of Decatur (26 October – 29 October) – Confederates unable to cross river. Battle of Boydton Plank Road (27 October – 28 October) – Union forces take control of road, but withdraw after battle. Second Battle of Newtonia 28 October – James G. Blunt defeats Joseph O. Shelby. Battle of Johnsonville (4 November – 5 November) – Confederates bombard Union forces during the night after a fire starts near union positions. Battle of Bull&apos;s Gap (11 November – 13 November) – Minor Confederate victory during the American Civil War. Sherman&apos;s March to the Sea 16 November – Sherman lays waste to South Battle of Columbia 24 November – Confederates divert attention First Battle of Adobe Walls 25 November – Kit Carson fights Kiowa forces to a draw, but manages to destroy their settlement. Battle of Spring Hill 29 November – Confederate mistakes allow Federal forces to redeploy, leading to the Battle of Franklin. Battle of Sand Creek – U.S. forces massacre Cheyenne and Arapaho. Battle of Franklin 30 November – Hood attacks Thomas but loses Battle of Waynesboro, Georgia 4 December – Kilpatrick stops Wheeler from attacking Sherman. Third Battle of Murfreesboro (5 December – 7 December) – Confederate raid mostly unsuccessful. First Battle of Fort Fisher (7 December – 27 December) – Failed Union attempt to take fort. Battle of Nashville (15 December – 16 December) – Confederate Army in Tennessee overwhelmed. [ 1865 ] Second Battle of Fort Fisher 15 January – Union takes fort Battle of Rivers&apos; Bridge 3 February – Union forces capture river crossing. Battle of Hatcher&apos;s Run 5 February – Union force launch unexpected attack. Battle of Wilmington ( North Carolina ) 22 February – Last rebel port falls Battle of Waynesboro, Virginia 2 March – Jubal Anderson Early &apos;s army destroyed Battle of Natural Bridge 6 March – Confederate victory in Florida prevents the capture of Tallahassee. Battle of Wyse Fork (7 March – 10 March) – Confederate attacks repelled by Union artillery. Battle of Averasborough 16 March – Union and Confederate forces attack one another in turn, both attacks fail. Battle of Bentonville (19 March – 21 March) – Sherman defeats Confederates Wilson&apos;s Raid 22 March – 20 April – Union cavalry operate through Alabama and Georgia in the final stages of the Civil War, opposed by Nathan Bedford Forest. Battle of Fort Steadman 25 March – Lee breaks siege Battle of Lewis&apos;s Farm 29 March – Union forces capture Confederate earthworks. Battle of White Oak Road 31 March – Confederate forces under Richard H. Anderson defeated. Battle of Dinwiddie Court House 31 March – Pickett defeats Sheridan. Battle of Five Forks 1 April – Sheridan routs Confederates in last important battle of the American Civil War. Battle of Selma 2 April – Wilson defeats Forrest. Third Battle of Petersburg 2 April – Grant defeats Lee. Battle of Sutherland&apos;s Station 2 April – Lee&apos;s supply lines are cut. Battle of Namozine Church 3 April – Several Confederates captured, Custer &apos;s brother earns Medal of Honor. Battle of Sayler&apos;s Creek 6 April – Union victory, Lee realizes his army will not last long. Battle of High Bridge (6 April – 7 April) – Union forces thwart Lee&apos;s attempts to burn bridges and to resupply, Grant proposes that Lee surrender, but he refuses. Battle of Cumberland Church 7 April – Union forces attack Confederate rearguard, but darkness cuts the attack short. Battle of Spanish Fort (27 March – 8 April) – Union forces capture fort just east of Mobile. Battle of Appomattox Station 8 April – Union forces thwart Lee&apos;s final attempt to resupply. Battle of Fort Blakely (2 April – 9 April) – Union forces capture fort outside of Mobile. Battle of Appomattox Courthouse 9 April – Lee&apos;s forces surrounded. He subsequently surrenders. Battle of Morrisville 13 April – 15 April – Last cavalry battle of the American Civil War. Battle of West Point 16 April – Union victory during final phase of American Civil War. Battle of Palmito Ranch (12 May – 13 May) – Confederate victory in Texas during final phases of the American Civil War. Battle of Riachuelo 11 June – Brazil defeats Paraguay Battle of Jataí or Yataí 17 August- The combined army of the Triple Alliance (Brazil, Argentina and Uruguay) attacks a Paraguayan column of troops in the Paraguayan War Battle of the Tongue River 29 August – U.S. forces led by Patrick E. Connor defeat Arapaho forces. Battle of Papudo 26 November – Peru and Chile defeat Spain in a naval battle. [ 1866–1875 ] Battle of Abtao 7 February – Indecisive battle between combined Peruvian-Chilean fleet and Spanish fleet. Battle of Callao 2 May – Spain defeats Peruvian forces. Battle of Tuyutí or Tuyuty 24 May- The combined army of the Triple Alliance (Brazil, Argentina and Uruguay) is attacked by Paraguayan Army in the swamp fields of Tuyuty (Paraguay). Almost 60,000 took part in the fight. 16,000 casualties (8,000 allied; 12,000 Paraguayans). Paraguayan War Battle of Ridgeway 2 June – Fenian Brotherhood defeats Canadians. Battle of Fort Erie 2 June – Canadian force overwhelmed by main Fenian army. Battle of Langensalza 27 June – Hanoverian Army under King George V defeated by Prussians under General Flies Austro-Prussian War Battle of Burkersdorf 28 June Battle of Königgrätz – (Sadowa) Prussia, led by General Helmuth von Moltke, defeats Austria in Austro-Prussian War, resulting in Prussia taking over as prominent German nation from Austria Battle of Custoza – During Austro-Prussian War Battle of Lissa 20 July – Austrian Admiral Wilhelm von Tegetthoff rams and drives off Italian fleet under Persano. First clash of ironclad s. Battle of Bezzecca 21 July – Garibaldi defeats Austrians. Battle of Curupaity 22 September – Argentine and Brazilian forces of 20,000 men attack Paraguayan trenches on Curupaity. Paraguayan War. { 1867 - } Battle of Fandane-Thiouthioune 18 July - the Serer people defeated the Muslim jihad ists of Senegambia (present-day Senegal and the Gambia ). { 1868 – } Pasoemah Expedition – Expedition of the Royal Netherlands East Indies Army to the Pasoemah (also Pasumah) region in South Sumatra. The expedition lasted from 1864 to 1868 Battle of Magdala 9 April-13 – Sir Robert Napier defeats the army of Emperor Tewodros II of Ethiopia and captures Magdala by assault. Tewodros commits suicide. Battle of Washita River 27 November – George Armstrong Custer defeats Black Kettle. Battle of Itororó 6 December- First battle of a series fought the month of December between the Brazilian Army and the Paraguayan one. Around 13,000 Brazilians attack a fortified position on a river bridge, defended by 5,000 Paraguayans. Paraguayan War Battle of Avahy or Avaí 11 December- 17,000 Allied troops, mainly Brazilians, attack 4,000 Paraguayans. Paraguaayn War Battle of Lomas-Valentinas 21 December-27 December- Fought in two days between The Triple Alliance Army (Brazil, Argentina and Uruguay) against Paraguayan forces (19,500 allies on the first day; 25,000 on the second/ 6,500 Paraguayans). The end of the Paraguayan Army by death or captured. Paraguayan War { 1870 } Battle of Eccles Hill 25 May – Canadians defeat Fenian Brotherhood. Battle of Wissembourg 4 August – German victory during Franco-Prussian War. Battle of Spicheren 6 August – Karl Friedrich von Steinmetz leads Prussians to victory over the French. Battle of Woerth 6 August – German Crown Prince defeats French forces. Battle of Mars-La-Tour 16 August - German strategic victory against French. Battle of Gravelotte 18 August - German victory against French. Battle of Sedan 1 September – Mac-Mahon &apos;s French lose to Germans, paving the way to the founding of the German Empire Siege of Strasbourg (ended 28 September) – Germans capture city. Battle of Le Bourget (27 September – 30 September) – Albert, King of Saxony defeats French forces. Battle of Chevilly 30 September – French attack on Prussian forces repulsed. Siege of Metz (19 August – 27 October) – François Achille Bazaine forced to surrender. Battle of Coulmiers (november 1870) French army, under general Aurelles de Paladines, defeat a Bavarian army. Liberation of the city of Orléans. Battle of Villiers (29 November – 3 December) – Germans defeat French. { 1871 } Battle of the Lisaine (15 January – 17 January) – French efforts to lift the Siege of Belfort fail. Battle of St. Quentin 19 January – Prussians defeat French. Battle of Buzenval 20 January – German Crown Prince defeats the French. Siege of Belfort (ended 18 February) – German victory during Franco-Prussian War. { 1873 – } First Battle of the Stronghold 17 January First Aceh Expedition Part of the Aceh War. An expedition under Major General Johan Harmen Rudolf Köhler. The intention of the Dutch was to attack and take the Sultan&apos;s palace. { 1874 – } Second Battle of Adobe Walls 27 June – 28 hunters hold off 300 Comanche warriors. Battle of Palo Duro Canyon 28 September – Comanche, Cheyenne, and Kiowa defeated by United States forces. [ 1876 to 1900 ] Battle of Gura 7–9 March – Emperor of Ethiopia Yohannes IV decisively defeats an Egypt ian punitive attack. Battle of the Rosebud 17 June – U.S. victory over Crazy Horse, but George Crook is delayed, preventing him from uniting with Custer. Battle of Little Big Horn 25 June – Sitting Bull, Crazy Horse of Sioux defeat Custer in Montana Battle of Warbonnet Creek 17 July – U.S. victory over Lone Wolf &apos;s forces, famous duel between Buffalo Bill Cody and a Cheyenne warrior he mistook for Yellow Hand. Dull Knife Fight 25 November – U.S. and Pawnee forces defeat the Cheyenne. { 1877 } Battle of Slim Buttes 8 January – Crazy Horse defeated by U.S. Cavalry forces. Battle of Kizil-Tepe 25 June – Ottoman victory during the Russo-Turkish War. Battle of the Clearwater 10 July – Chief Joseph of the Nez Perce defeated by Oliver Otis Howard of the United States. Battle of Nikopol 16 July – Russian forces capture city. First Battle of Shipka Pass (17 July – 19 July) – Joseph Gourko seizes pass from Suleiman Pasha. Battle of the Big Hole 9 August – Minor U.S. victory over the Nez Perce, John Gibbon wounded. Second Battle of Shipka Pass (21 August – 26 August) – Ottomans unable to retake pass. Battle of Lovcha (1 September – 3 September) – Mikhail Skobelev defeats Osman Pasha in Bulgaria. Third Battle of Shipka Pass (13 September – 17 September) – Suleiman Pasha fails in a second Ottoman attempt to retake the pass. Battle of Bear Paw (30 September – 5 October) – American victory forces Chief Joseph to surrender. Battle of Gorni-Dubnik 24 October – Gourko captures fortress. Battle of Kars 17 November – Russian forces capture city. Siege of Plevna (20 July – 10 December) – Russians, after reverses, defeat Ottomans { 1878 – } Fourth Battle of Shipka Pass (5 January – 9 January)- Russians defeat Ottomans. Battle of Philippopolis 17 January – Ottomans forced to retreat to Constantinople. { 1879 – } Battle of Isandlwana 22 January – Zulu combined army annihilates British-led force, start of Anglo-Zulu War Battle of Rorke&apos;s Drift 22 January – A small, heavily outnumbered British force defeats the Zulus in one of Britain&apos;s finest hours. Battle of Intombe 12 March – Zulu army destroys small British force in an ambush Battle of Topáter 23 March – Chile defeats Bolivia during the War of the Pacific Battle of Hlobane 28 March – British suffer yet another disaster at Zulu hands on the mountain of Hlobane Battle of Kambula 29 March – Zulu Impi defeated in an attack on a British laager in Britain&apos;s first major victory in the war Battle of Gingindlovu 2 April – British defeat Zulu. Siege of Eshowe (ended 3 April) – British victory during Anglo-Zulu War. Battle of Chipana 12 April – Indecisive naval battle between Chile and Bolivia. Battle of Iquique 21 May – Indecisive battle between Chile and the combined forces of Peru and Bolivia. Battle of Ulundi 4 July – Decisive British victory at Zulu capital, end of Anglo-Zulu War Naval Battle of Angamos 8 October – Chilean navy defeats the navies of Peru and Bolivia. Battle of Pisagua 2 November – Successful Chilean amphibious assault. Battle of San Francisco 19 November – Peruvian and Bolivian troops ambush Chileans, but Bolivians retreat, forcing Peruvians to follow suit. Battle of Tarapacá 27 November – Peru defeats Chile. { 1880 – } Battle of Arica 2 July – Chile storms Peruvian positions atop a hill. Heavy casualties including Peruvian commander and several Chilean officers. Second Aceh Expedition – Dutch Colonial forces take the sultan&apos;s palace in Aceh. Battle of Bronkhorstspruit 20 December – Transvaal Boers defeat British. { 1881 – } Battle of Laing&apos;s Nek 28 January – Boer victory, British gunfire holds Boers back long enough to allow retreat. Battle of Schuinshoogte 8 February – Rain stops the battle before British reinforcements arrive, Boer victory. Battle of Majuba Hill 27 February – Boer victory over British, George Pomeroy Colley killed. { 1882 – } Battle of Embabo 6 June – Shewa n forces under Negus Menelik II defeat the opposing forces of Gojjam under Negus Tekle Haymanot, giving Shewa the hegemony over the Gibe region and making Menelik the most powerful ruler in Ethiopia except for Emperor Yohannes IV Battle of Tel al-Kebir – British forces defeat Egyptian army under Colonel Urabi. { 1883 – } Battle of El Obeid – Mahdi wipes out Egyptians controlling Sudan Continuing war – Third part of the Aceh War. Major J.B. van Heutsz, conquered the rest of Aceh, and became Governor Of the Dutch East Indies. { 1884 – } Battles of El Teb 4 February and 29 February – Mahdi forces battle Egypt ian then British forces. Battle of Tamai 13 March – British forces under Sir Gerald Graham defeat a Mahdi army under Osman Digna, despite the successful breaking of an infantry square. Battle of Foochow 23 August – French fleet destroys Chinese fleet at Foochow { 1885 – } Battle of Khartoum – After a 10-month siege, on 26 January the Mahdi capture the city from the British, slaughtering the garrison and its commander, Chinese Gordon, as well as 4,000 inhabitants Battle of Duck Lake 26 March – Gabriel Dumont wins a victory for the Métis people during the North West Rebellion in Saskatchewan. Battle of Fort Pitt (2 April – 15 April) Cree forces destroy Canadian fort. Battle of Fish Creek 24 April – Frederick Middleton withdraws the Canadian force from what could have been a victory over the Métis. Battle of Cut Knife 2 May – Cree and Assiniboine defeat Canadian force Battle of Batoche (5 May – 12 May) – Middleton defeats Dumont. Battle of Frenchman&apos;s Butte 28 May – Cree withstand Canadian assault. Battle of Loon Lake 3 June – Canadian Dominion defeats the Cree. Battle of Kufit 23 September – Ras Alula defeats an invading Mahdi army led by Osman Digna. Battle of Slivnitsa 5–7 November (OS) – Bulgarians win the decisive engagement of the Serbo-Bulgarian War Battle of Pirot 14 – 15 November (OS) – last battle of the Serbo-Bulgarian War. Battle of Ginnis 30 December – Anglo-Egyptian Army defeat Mahdist Sudanese warriors of Dervish Empire, effectively ending First Sudan Campaign. { 1887 – } Battle of Chelenqo 9 January – Negus Menelik II routs the tiny Harar i army of emir `Abd-Allah II, leading to the conquest of Harar. Battle of Dogali 24 January – Ras Alula annihilates an Italian battalion sent to relieve an Ethiopia n siege of Sahati. { 1889 } { Battle of Gallabat 9–10 March – At the moment his army is about to crush the } { Mahdi army, Emperor } { Yohannes IV is killed, and his army defeated. } { 1890 – } Battle of Wounded Knee 29 December – Sioux crushed in last Indian Wars battle { 1891 – } Battle of Mulayda 24 January – Rashidi troops ended the Second Saudi State. { 1894 } { Battle of Yalu River 17 September – Japanese fleet barely defeats Chinese off Korea } { 1895 – } Battle of Coatit 13–14 January – After occupying Adwa, the Italians defeat a counterattack by Ras Mangesha Yohannes. Battle of Amba Alagi 7 December – Ras Makonnen Woldemikael leads the first Ethiopia n counterstrike of the First Italo-Abyssinian War to success. { 1896 – } Siege of Mek&apos;ele 6–21 January – The forces of Menelik II besiege the Italians at Mek&apos;ele, until the defenders receive permission allowing them to leave the town. Battle of Adowa 1 March – Ethiopia n soldiers under Emperor Menelik II deal a humiliating defeat upon Italian troops. Battle of Binakayan 9–11 November – The first major victory of the Philippine Revolutionary soldiers under by General Emilio Aguinaldo, Lieutenant General Edilberto Evangelista, General Candido Tirona and Gregoria Montoya y Patricio was captured in the town of Cavite el Viejo (now. Kawit, Cavite ) and defeated and retreated by the Spanish Colonial forces. { 1897 } { Battle of Dömeke – Ottoman victory during Greco Turkish war on } { Crete n conflict } { 1897 } Battle of Saragarhi – on 12 September 1897 between twenty-one Sikhs of the 4th Battalion (then 36th Sikhs) of the Sikh Regiment of British India, defending an army post, and 10,000 Afghan Battle of Zapote Bridge 17 February – The victory of the Philippine Revolutionary forces headed by General Emilio Aguinaldo and General Edilberto Evangelista to captured of Zapote Bridge in Bacoor, Cavite to defeated and attacked by the Spanish Colonial forces under Governor-General Camilo de Polavieja. { 1898 – } Battle of Manila Bay 1 May – Dewey says &quot; You may fire when you are ready Gridley &quot; Battle of Cárdenas 11 May – Spanish naval victory near Cuba. Battle of Cienfuegos 11 May – U.S. forces cut two telegraph cables, but fail to destroy a third due to Spanish intervention. Battle of San Juan 12 May – Indecisive battle in Puerto Rico. Invasion of Guantánamo Bay (6 June – 10 June) – United States commences its invasion of Cuba during the Spanish-American War. Battle of Guam (20 June – 21 June) – U.S. forces capture island, Spanish governor protests since he was unaware of the Declaration of War. Battle of Las Guasimas 24 June – First major land battle of Spanish-American War. Battle of Tayacoba 30 June – U.S. forces barely able to rescue trapped reconnaissance force. Battle of El Caney 1 July – Spanish forces hold back Americans. Battle of San Juan Hill 1 July – Theodore Roosevelt storms the hill, U.S. victory. Battle of Santiago de Cuba 3 July – Admiral Cervera&apos;s Spanish fleet destroyed trying to escape blockading US Fleet and reach reinforcements Siege of Santiago (3 July – 18 July) – American forces capture city, but the outbreak of disease begins to take its toll on the Americans. Battle of Rio Manimani 23 July – Unsuccessful American landing attempt in Cuba. Battle of Yauco 26 July – American victory despite desertions. Battle of Guayama 5 August – American push past Spanish snipers to take town. Battle of Guamani 9 August – United States victory in Puerto Rico. Battle of Coamo 9 August – Americans troops destroy the Spanish garrison at Coamo, Puerto Rico Battle of Silva Heights 10 August – Spanish forces retreat after American attack with cannons and gatling guns. Battle of Abonito Pass 12 August – Battle interrupted by news of armistice. Battle of Manila (Spanish-American War) (25 July – 15 August) – U.S. and Filipino forces capture Philippine capital from Spanish. Battle of Omdurman 2 September – British under Kitchener ambushed by Sudanese dervishes { 1899 – } Battle of Manila (Philippine-American War) (4 February-5) – American troops engage with the Philippine Army in the first battle of the Philippine-American War. After hard fighting, the Americans rout the Filipinos. Battle of Santa Cruz (9 April – 10 April) – American victory during Philippine-American War. Battle of Pagsanjan 11 April – Philippine forces routed by American sharpshooters and artillery. Battle of Paete 12 April – Americans under Henry W. Lawton defeat small Philippine force. Battle of Talana Hill 20 October – British pyrrhic victory over the Boers. Battle of Elandslaagte 21 October – Successful British cavalry charge in bad weather. Battle of a Thousand Days in Colombia 24 October – Liberals vs. Conservatives, Successful Colombia lost Panamá (24 October 1899 – 24 October 1902). Battle of San Jacinto 11 November – American forces defeat Philippine army under General Tinio. Battle of Modder River 28 November – British defeat Boers under Piet Cronjé. Battle of Stormberg 10 December – Boer victory during Second Boer War. Battle of Magersfontein 11 December – Piet Cronjé defeats British forces. Battle of Colenso 15 December – British forces attacked while caught in a loop of a river, heavy casualties. { 1900 – } Battle of Spion Kop 24 January – Boer victory Battle of Paardeberg 18 February – 27 – British capture forces of Boer general Piet Cronjé Siege of Ladysmith (2 November 1899 – 28 February) – Unsuccessful Boer siege. Battle of Sanna&apos;s Post 31 March – British forces caught in double-pronged Boer ambush. Siege of Mafeking (13 October 1899 – 17 May) – British forces withstand Boer siege. Battle of Pulang Lupa 13 September – Filipino guerillas ambush and defeat a U.S. Infantry column during the Philippine-American War. Battle of Mabitac (17 September 1900) – Filipino soldiers under General Juan Cailles outmaneuver the 37th and 15th U.S. Volunteer Infantry during the Philippine-American War. List of battles : before 601 – 601–1400 – 1401–1800 – 1801–1900 – 1901–2000 – 2001–current See also: Battles of the American Civil War Category:19th-century conflicts Category:Lists of battles by date bg:Войни и битки през 19 век de:Liste der Kriege und Schlachten im 19. Jahrhundert es:Anexo:Batallas del siglo XIX fr:Liste de batailles du XIXe siècle hr:Dodatak:Popis bitaka 1801.-1900. ru:Список сражений XIX века