[ May 2011 ] [ Carcassonne Carcassona Cité de Carcassonne.jpg Languedoc-Roussillon Aude Carcassonne 11069 11000 Jean-Claude Perez ( PS ) 2008–2014 Carcassonne 43.2131 2.352 111 81 250 65.08 47634 2008 ] Carcassonne ( [ kaʁ.ka.sɔn ]; [ Carcassona ] ) is a fortified French town in the Aude department, of which it is the prefecture, in the former province of Languedoc. It is divided into the fortified Cité de Carcassonne and the more expansive lower city, the ville basse. Carcassone was founded by the Visigoths in the fifth century, though the Romans had fortified the settlement earlier. The fortress, which was thoroughly restored in 1853 by the theorist and architect Eugène Viollet-le-Duc, was added to the UNESCO list of World Heritage Sites in 1997. { &quot; Historic Fortified City of Carcassonne &quot;. } { UNESCO. Accessed 11 August 2008. } The folk etymology – involving a châtelain e named [ fra Carcas ], a ruse ending a siege and the joyous ringing of bells ( &quot; [ fra Carcas ] sona &quot; ) – though memorialized in a neo-Gothic sculpture of Mme. [ fra Carcas ] on a column near the Narbonne Gate, is of modern invention. The name can be derived as a hyperbole of the name Carcas. Similarly in the Italian language, there are derived names like Castellino (little castle) – Castello – Castellone (big castle), or Ombrellino (small umbrella) – Ombrello – Ombrellone (large umbrella). A double &apos;s&apos; in the name appears for phonetic reasons, otherwise as a self standing &apos;s&apos; it would be pronounced as &apos;z&apos;. [ History ] First signs of settlement in this region have been dated to about 3500 BC, but the hill site of Carsac – a Celt ic place-name that has been retained at other sites in the south – became an important trading place in the 6th century BC. The Volcae Tectosages fortified the oppidum. Carcassonne became strategically identified when Romans fortified the hilltop around 100 BC and eventually made it the colonia of Julia Carsaco, later Carcasum (by the process of swapping consonants known as metathesis ). The main part of the lower courses of the northern rampart s dates from Gallo-Roman times. In 462 the Romans officially ceded Septimania to the Visigothic king Theodoric II who had held Carcassonne since 453; he built more fortification s at Carcassonne, which was a frontier post on the northern marches: traces of them still stand. Theodoric is thought to have begun the predecessor of the basilica that is now dedicated to Saint Nazaire. In 508 the Visigoths successfully foiled attacks by the Frankish king Clovis. Saracens from Barcelona took Carcassonne in 725, but King Pepin the Short (Pépin le Bref) drove them away in 759-60; though he took most of the south of France, he was unable to penetrate the impregnable fortress of Carcassonne. [ County of Carcassonne ] A medieval fiefdom, the county of Carcassonne, controlled the city and its environs. It was often united with the County of Razès. The origins of Carcassonne as a county probably lie in local representatives of the Visigoth s, but the first count known by name is Bello of the time of Charlemagne. Bello founded a dynasty, the Bellonids, which would rule many honores in Septimania and Catalonia for three centuries. { Cathars being expelled from Carcassonne in 1209 } In 1067, Carcassonne became the property of Raimond Bernard Trencavel, viscount of Albi and Nîmes, through his marriage with Ermengard, sister of the last count of Carcassonne. In the following centuries, the Trencavel family allied in succession either with the counts of Barcelona or of Toulouse. They built the Château Comtal and the Basilica of Saint-Nazaire. In 1096, Pope Urban II blessed the foundation stones of the new cathedral, a Catholic bastion against the Cathar s. Carcassonne became famous in its role in the Albigensian Crusade s, when the city was a stronghold of Occitan Cathars. In August 1209 the crusading army of Simon de Montfort forced its citizens to surrender. Raymond-Roger de Trencavel was imprisoned whilst negotiating his city&apos;s surrender, held in his own dungeon and allowed to die.Montfort was appointed the new viscount. He added to the fortifications. Carcassonne became a border citadel between France and the kingdom of Aragon (Spain). In 1240, Trencavel&apos;s son tried to reconquer his old domain but in vain. The city submitted to the rule of the kingdom of France in 1247, and King Louis IX founded the new part of the town across the river. He and his successor Philip III built the outer ramparts. Contemporary opinion still considered the fortress impregnable. During the Hundred Years&apos; War, Edward the Black Prince failed to take the city in 1355, although his troops destroyed the Lower Town. In 1659, the Treaty of the Pyrenees transferred the border province of Roussillon to France, and Carcassonne&apos;s military significance was reduced. Fortifications were abandoned, and the city became mainly an economic centre that concentrated on the wool len textile industry, for which a 1723 source quoted by Fernand Braudel found it &quot; the manufacturing centre of Languedoc &quot;. { Fernand Braudel, The Wheels of Commerce 1982, vol. II of Civilization and Capitalism, Brian Anderson. } [ Population ] [ 10,400 15,219 14,985 15,752 20,997 22,623 21,333 21,607 29,298 19,915 ] [ yes 20,644 22,173 24,407 25,971 27,512 29,330 28,235 37,035 30,720 30,976 ] [ yes 30,689 29,314 33,974 34,921 33,441 38,139 37,035 40,897 43,616 42,154 ] [ yes 41,153 43,470 43,950 47,634 ] [ Main sights ] [ The fortified city ] &apos;&apos;Fortress&apos;&apos; of Carcassonne [ Cité de Carcassonne ] [ July 2008 ] The fortified city itself consists essentially of a concentric design with two outer walls with towers and barbicans to prevent attack by siege engines. The castle itself possesses its own drawbridge and ditch leading to a central keep. The walls consist of towers built over quite a long period. One section is Roman and is notably different from the medieval walls with the tell-tale red brick layers and the shallow pitch terracotta tile roofs. One of these towers housed the Catholic Inquisition in the 13th Century and is still known as &quot; The Inquisition Tower &quot;. Today there is a museum &quot; Musée de la Torture &quot;, which shows some of the original torture equipment employed by the Catholic Church. Carcassonne was struck off the roster of official fortifications under Napoleon and the Restoration, and the fortified cité of Carcassonne fell into such disrepair that the French government decided that it should be demolished. A decree to that effect that was made official in 1849 caused an uproar. The antiquary and mayor of Carcassonne, Jean-Pierre Cros-Mayrevieille, and the writer Prosper Mérimée, the first inspector of ancient monuments, led a campaign to preserve the fortress as a historical monument. Later in the year the architect Eugène Viollet-le-Duc, already at work restoring the Basilica of Saint-Nazaire, was commissioned to renovate the place. In 1853, works began with the west and southwest walling, followed by the towers of the porte Narbonnaise and the principal entrance to the cité. The fortifications were consolidated here and there, but the chief attention was paid to restoring the roofing of the towers and the ramparts, where Viollet-le-Duc ordered the destruction of structures that had encroached against the walls, some of them of considerable age. Viollet-le-Duc left copious notes and drawings on his death in 1879, when his pupil Paul Boeswillwald, and later the architect Nodet continued the rehabilitation of Carcassonne. The restoration was strongly criticized during Viollet-le-Duc&apos;s lifetime. Fresh from work in the north of France, he made the error of using slates and restoring the roofs as pointed cones, where local practice was traditionally of tile roofing and low slopes, in a snow-free environment. Yet, overall, Viollet-le-Duc&apos;s achievement at Carcassonne is agreed to be a work of genius, though not of the strictest authenticity. The fortification consists of a double ring of ramparts and 53 towers. [ Other ] Another bridge, Pont Marengo, crosses the Canal du Midi and provides access to the railway station. Lac de la Cavayère has been created as a recreational lake and is about five minutes from the city centre. [ Carcasssonne_vieux_pont.jpg 1800px The fortified city of Carcassonne and the Pont Vieux crossing the Aude river ] Further sights include: the Basilica of St. Nazaire and St. Celse The Cathedral Church of St. Vincent [ Economy ] Ville Basse from the walled city The newer part (Ville Basse) of the city on the other side of the Aude river (which dates back from the Middle Ages, created after the crusade) manufactures shoes, rubber and textiles. It is also the centre of a major AOC wine-growing region. A major part of its income, however, comes from the tourism connected to the fortifications (Cité) and from boat cruising on the Canal du Midi. Carcassonne receives about three million visitors annually. [ Transport ] In the late 1990s Carcassonne airport started taking budget flights to and from European airports and by 2009 had regular flight connections with Bournemouth, Cork, Dublin, Edinburgh, Frankfurt-Hahn, Stansted, Liverpool, East Midlands, Glasgow and Charleroi. The Gare de Carcassonne railway station offers direct connections to Toulouse, Narbonne, Perpignan, Paris, Marseille and several regional destinations. The A61 motorway connects Carcassonne with Toulouse and Narbonne. [ Education ] École nationale de l&apos;aviation civile [ Language ] Historically, the language spoken in Carcassonne and throughout Languedoc-Roussillon was not French, but actually the quite different Occitan. [ Sport ] Carcassonne was the starting point for a stage in the 2004 Tour de France and a stage finish in the 2006 Tour de France. As in the rest of the south west of France, rugby union is popular in Carcassonne. The city is represented by Union Sportive Carcassonnaise, known locally simply as USC. The club have a proud history, having played in the French Championship Final in 1925, and currently compete in Pro D2, the second tier of French rugby. Rugby league is also played, by the AS Carcassonne club. They are involved in the Elite One Championship. Puig Aubert is the most notable rugby league player to come from the Carcassonne club and the city has a bronze statue of him. [ In popular culture ] Carcassonne, possibly because of its spectacular stronghold, is sometimes described in literature as a city people dream of seeing, without being able to do so. It gives its title to the short story &quot; Carcassonne &quot; by Lord Dunsany (in A Dreamer&apos;s Tales), and to a poem by Nadaud, sung by Georges Brassens. An early William Faulkner story also bears the title &quot; Carcassonne. &quot; On 6 March 2000 France issued a stamp commemorating the fortress of Carcassonne. Musée de La Poste The history of Carcassonne is re-told in the novel Labyrinth by Kate Mosse. A board game and a video game version of it are named after this town. Portions of the 1991 film Robin Hood: Prince of Thieves were shot in and around Carcassonne. A 1993 album by Stephan Eicher was named Carcassonne. In the one-man show Sea Wall, starring Andrew Scott, Carcassonne is mentioned frequently as a setting. [ Personalities ] Théophile Barrau, sculptor, 1848 Gilbert Benausse, rugby league footballer, 1932 Michael Martchenko, illustrator, 1942 Olivia Ruiz, female pop singer, 1980 David Ferriol, rugby league footballer, 1979 Fabrice Estebanez, rugby union footballer, 1981 [ Twin towns ] [ GER ] Eggenfelden, Germany [ See also ] Basilica of St. Nazaire and St. Celse Carcassonne Cathedral Communes of the Aude department [ References ] INSEE [ External links ] Helicopter flight over Carcassonne Virtual tour of the fortified walls of the city of Carcasonne [ Carcassonne Carcassonne ] Official website of the city of Carcassonne / / / / Cité de Carcassonne, from the French Ministry of Culture Carcassonne, Dream or Nightmare? Photo Gallery of Carcassonne in December Category:Populated places established in the 4th millennium BC Category:Communes of Aude Category:Prefectures in France Category:Medieval defences Category:Catharism Category:Châteaux in Aude Category:World Heritage Sites in France Category:Landmarks in France Category:Walled towns [ af ] [ fr ] [ no ] af:Carcassonne ar:قرقشونه an:Carcasona be:Каркасон be-x-old:Каркасон bg:Каркасон br:Carcassona ca:Carcassona ceb:Carcassonne cs:Carcassonne cy:Carcassonne da:Carcassonne de:Carcassonne et:Carcassonne el:Καρκασσόν es:Carcasona eo:Karkasuno eu:Carcasona fa:کارکاسون fr:Carcassonne gd:Carcassonne gl:Carcassonne ko:카르카손 io:Carcassonne id:Carcassonne it:Carcassonne he:קרקסון sw:Carcassonne kg:Carcassonne la:Carcaso lb:Carcassonne lt:Karkasonas hu:Carcassonne mg:Carcassonne ms:Carcassonne nl:Carcassonne (stad) ja:カルカソンヌ no:Carcassonne nn:Carcassonne oc:Carcassona pms:Carcassonne pl:Carcassonne pt:Carcassonne ro:Carcassonne ru:Каркасон simple:Carcassonne sk:Carcassonne sl:Carcassonne sr:Каркасон fi:Carcassonne sv:Carcassonne th:การ์กาซอน tr:Carcassonne uk:Каркассонн vi:Carcassonne vo:Carcassonne war:Carcassonne zh:卡尔卡松