Deprogramming is an attempt to force a person to abandon allegiance to a religious, political, economic, or social group. { &apos;&apos;Encyclopedia of religion, Volume 4 &apos;&apos;, Lindsay Jones, Macmillan Reference USA, 2005, pages 2291-2293 } { Children held hostage: dealing with programmed and brainwashed children,American Bar Association archive publications, Authors Stanley S. Clawar, Brynne V. Rivlin, American Bar Association. Section of Family Law Publisher Section of Family Law, American Bar Association, 1991 ISBN 0-89707-628-1, ISBN 978-0-89707-628-9, pages 142-144 } Methods and practices may involve kidnapping and coercion. [ Let Our Children Go! Patrick, Ted; Dulack, Tom E. P. Dutton 1976 0-525-14450-1 Deprogramming is the term, and it may be said to involve kidnapping at the very least, quite often assault and battery, almost invariably conspiracy to commit a crime, and illegal restraint. ] The person in question is taken against his/her will, which has led to controversies over freedom of religion, kidnapping and civil rights, as well as the violence which is sometimes involved. Deprogramming is commissioned by relatives, often parents of adult children, who object to someone&apos;s membership in an organization or group. It was started in the 1970s in the United States by Ted Patrick. The effectiveness, ethics and legality of deprogramming has been questioned by scholars, as well as by members of the Christian countercult movement. Similar actions, when done without force, are called &quot; exit counseling &quot;. Sometimes the word deprogramming is used in a wider (and/or ironic or humorous sense), to mean the freeing of someone (often oneself) from any previously uncritically assimilated idea. [ Background and basic description ] Steven Hassan, a former deprogrammer, wrote: In the early 1970s, Ted Patrick —a man with plenty of street smarts but, at the time, no formal training in counseling—believed that members of his family were being brainwashed by David Berg, the leader of a group called the Family International, now known as &quot; The Family. &quot; Patrick was determined to take action. He reasoned that since cults use indoctrination methods that &quot; program &quot; beliefs through hypnosis, repetition, and behavior modification techniques, he would reverse the process. He called the new procedure &quot; deprogramming. &quot; Deprogramming is essentially a content-oriented persuasion approach that sometimes involves abduction and typically involves forced detention. The actual deprogramming takes place when it is deemed possible to &quot; pick up &quot; the cult member, and when it is convenient for the deprogrammer. Typically, the cult member is driven to a secret location and guarded 24 hours a day, often with no privacy, even in the bathroom. Windows are sometimes nailed shut to prevent escape. The deprogramming continues for days, and sometimes weeks, until the cult member snaps out of the cult&apos;s mind control (or successfully pretends to do so). Law professor Douglas Laycock, author of Religious Liberty: The free exercise, wrote: Beginning in the 1970s, many parents responded to the initial conversion with &quot; deprogramming. &quot; The essence of deprogramming was to physically abduct the convert, isolate him and physically restrain him, and barrage him with continuous arguments and attacks against his new religion, threatening to hold him forever until he agreed to leave it. Religious Liberty: The free exercise Legal scholar Dean M. Kelley called deprogramming &quot; protracted spiritual gang-rape &quot; { (Dean Kelley, Deprogramming and Religious Liberty, Civil Liberties Review 23 (July/Aug, 1977) } [ Deprogramming procedures ] There has never been any standard deprogramming procedure and the descriptions vary greatly. There are many anecdotal reports and studies involving interviews of former deprogrammees. Deprogrammers generally operate on the assumption that the people they are paid to extract from religious organizations are victims of mind control (or brainwashing ). Books written by deprogrammers and exit counselor s say that the most essential part of freeing the mind of a person is to convince them that they had been under control. Ted Patrick, one of the pioneers of deprogramming, used a confrontational method: &quot; When you deprogram people, you force them to think...But I keep them off balance and this forces them to begin questioning, to open their minds. When the mind gets to a certain point, they can see through all the lies that they&apos;ve been programmed to believe. They realize that they&apos;ve been duped and they come out of it. Their minds start working again. &quot; A number of criminal proceedings against Patrick have resulted in felony convictions for kidnapping and unlawful imprisonment. { Price, Polly J. Regulation of religious proselytism in the United States. Brigham Young University Law Review. 2001 537-574. } Patrick described details of some of his abductions in his book Let Our Children Go! (E. P. Dutton, 1976, page 96) &quot; Wes had taken up a position facing the car, with his hands on the roof and his legs spread-eagled. There was no way to let him inside while he was braced like that. I had to make a quick decision. I reached down between Wes&apos;s legs, grabbed him by the crotch and squeezed —hard. He let out a howl, and doubled up, grabbing for his groin with both hands. Then I hit, shoving him headfirst into the back seat of the car and piling in on top of him. &quot; Sylvia Buford, an associate of Ted Patrick who has assisted him on many deprogrammings, described five stages of deprogramming (Stoner, C., &amp; Parke, J. (1977). All God&apos;s children: The cult experience - salvation or slavery? Radrior, PA: Chilton ): Discredit the figure of authority: the cult leader Present contradictions (ideology versus reality): &quot; How can he preach love when he exploits people? &quot; is an example. The breaking point: When a subject begins to listen to the deprogrammer; when reality begins to take precedence over ideology. Self-expression: When the subject begins to open up and voice gripes against the cult. Identification and transference: when the subject begins to identify with the deprogrammers, starts to think of him- or herself as an opponent of the cult rather than a member of it. [ Deprogramming and kidnapping ] Deprogramming has often been associated with kidnapping, which has in some cases been part of the procedure. The percentage stated of cases involving kidnapping varies considerably, depending on the source. Joseph Szimhart, a former deprogrammer, says &quot; until 1992, in a low percentage of my cases, included situations in which families elected to confine and sometimes abduct a &apos;cultist&apos; to a deprogramming. &quot; (Kent &amp; Szimhart, 2002). [ Deprogramming and violence ] The deprogramming accounts vary a lot regarding the use of force, with the most dramatic accounts coming from deprogrammed people who returned to the group. Steven Hassan in his book Releasing the Bonds spoke decidedly against coercive deprogramming methods using force or threats. The deprogramming case observed by Dubrow-Eichel did not include any violence. Sociologist Eileen Barker wrote in Watching for Violence : &quot; Although deprogramming has become less violent in the course of time... Numerous testimonies by those who were subjected to a deprogramming describe how they were threatened with a gun, beaten, denied sleep and food and/or sexually assaulted. But one does not have to rely on the victims for stories of violence: Ted Patrick, one of the most notorious deprogrammers used by CAGs (who has spent several terms in prison for his exploits) openly boasts about some of the violence he employed; in November 1987, Cyril Vosper, a Committee member of the British cult-awareness group, FAIR, was convicted in Munich of &quot; causing bodily harm &quot; in the course of one of his many deprogramming attempts; and a number of similar convictions are on record for prominent members of CAGs elsewhere. &quot; In Colombrito vs. Kelly, the Court accepted the definition of deprogramming by J. Le Moult published in 1978 in the Fordham Law Review: &quot; Deprogrammers are people who, at the request of a parent or other close relative, will have a member of a religious sect seized, then hold him against his will and subject him to mental, emotional, and even physical pressures until he renounces his religious beliefs. Deprogrammers usually work for a fee, which may easily run as high as $25,000. The deprogramming process begins with abduction. Often strong men muscle the subject into a car and take him to a place where he is cut from everyone but his captors. He may be held against his will for upward of three weeks. Frequently, however, the initial deprogramming only last a few days. The subject&apos;s sleep is limited and he is told that he will not be released until his beliefs meet his captors&apos; approval. Members of the deprogramming group, as well as members of the family, come into the room where the victim is held and barrage him with questions and denunciations until he recants his newly found religion &quot; Exit counselor Carol Giambalvo writes in From Deprogramming to Thought Reform Consultation &quot; It was believed that the hold of the brainwashing over the cognitive processes of a cult member needed to be broken – or &quot; snapped &quot; as some termed it – by means that would shock or frighten the cultist into thinking again. For that reason in some cases cult leader&apos;s pictures were burned or there were highly confrontational interactions between deprogrammers and cultist. What was often sought was an emotional response to the information, the shock, the fear, and the confrontation. There are horror stories – promoted most vehemently by the cults themselves – about restraint, beatings, and even rape. And we have to admit that we have met former members who have related to us their deprogramming experience – several of handcuffs, weapons wielded and sexual abuse. But thankfully, these are in the minority – and in our minds, never justified. Nevertheless, deprogramming helped to free many individuals held captive to destructive cults at a time when other alternatives did not seem viable. &quot; [ Effectiveness and Harm ] Alan W. Gomes (chairman of the department of theology at Talbot School of Theology, Biola University ) in his 2009 book Unmasking the Cults reports: While advocates of the deprogramming position have claimed high rates of success, studies show that natural attrition rates actually are higher than the success rate achieved through deprogramming. Gomes, Alan W., Unmasking the Cults,Zondervan Guide to Cults and Religious Movements, Zondervan, 2009ISBN 0-310-86455-0, ISBN 978-0-310-86455-4 The Dialog Center International (DCI) a major Christian counter-cult organization founded in 1973 by a Danish professor of missiology and ecumenical theology, Dr. Johannes Aagaard { Obituary, 23 March 2007 } rejects deprogramming, believing that it is counterproductive, ineffective, and can harm the relationship between a cult member and concerned family members. { Exploring New Religions, } { George D. Chryssides, Continuum International Publishing Group, 2001, ISBN 0-8264-5959-5, ISBN 978-0-8264-5959-6, pages 353-254 } Professor of psychiatry Saul Levine suggests that it is doubtful that deprogramming helps many people and goes on to say that it actually causes harm to the victim by very nature of the deprogramming. For deprogramming to work, the victim must be convinced that they joined a religious group against their will. They then must renounce responsibility and accept that in some mysterious way that their minds were controlled. { Levine, The Role of Psychiatry in the Phenomenon of Cults &quot;, Canada Journal of Psychiatry 24 (1979) } It is Levine&apos;s professional opinion that once deprogrammed, a person would never be certain that they were really doing what they want. He states that deprogramming destroys a person&apos;s identity and is likely to create permanent anxiety about freedom of choice and leave the deprogrammed subject dependent upon the guidance and advice of others. &quot; Fundamentally deprogramming denies choice and creates dependency. It robs people of their sense of responsibility. Instead of encouraging people to accept that they made a mistake, it encourages people to deny their actions and blame others. &quot; { Levine, The Role of Psychiatry in the Phenomenon of Cults &quot; Canada Journal of Psychiatry 24 (1979) } { Understanding Cults and New Age Religions, by Irving Hexham, Karla Poewe, and J. I. Packer } [ Controversy and related issues ] [ Mind control#Deprogramming and the anti-cult movement Mind control: Deprogramming and the anti-cult movement ] In the United States, from the mid-1970s and throughout the 1980s mind control was widely accepted, and the vast majority of newspaper and magazine accounts of deprogrammings assumed that recruits&apos; relatives were well justified to seek conservatorship s and to hire deprogrammers. It took nearly 20 years for public opinion to shift. One aspect that gradually became disturbing from a civil rights point of view, was that relatives would use deception, or legal dealings or even kidnapping to get the recruit into deprogrammers&apos; hands, without allowing the person any recourse to a lawyer or psychiatrist of their own choosing. Previously, there would be a sanity hearing first, and only then a commitment to an asylum or involuntary therapy. But with deprogramming, judges routinely granted parents legal authority over their adult children without a hearing. One of main objections raised to deprogramming (as well as to exit counseling ) is the contention that they begin with a false premise. Lawyers for some groups who have lost members due to deprogramming, as well as some civil libertarian s, sociologist s and psychologist s, argue that it is not the religious groups but rather the deprogrammers who are the ones who deceive and manipulate people. David Bromley and Anson Shupe wrote: [ Deprogrammers are like the American colonials who persecuted &quot; witches &quot; : a confession, drawn up before the suspect was brought in for torturing and based on the judges&apos; fantasies about witchcraft, was signed under duress and then treated as justification for the torture. OUR RESPONSE TO ALLEGATIONS OF MIND CONTROL AND BRAINWASHING, citing Strange Gods, The Great American Cult Scare, page 198-204 ] After 10 or 15 years of this, some of these adult children began suing their parents or deprogrammers. Since that time, involuntary deprogramming has been virtually unknown in the United States. Also, in the mid-1980s, psychologist Margaret Singer stopped being accepted as an expert witness after the APA declined to endorse the DIMPAC report. { May 11, 1987, APA MEMORANDUM available online } The American Civil Liberties Union published a statement in 1977 which said: [ ACLU opposes the use of mental incompetency proceedings, temporary conservatorship, or denial of government protection as a method of depriving people of the free exercise of religion, at least with respect to people who have reached the age of majority. Mode of religious proselytizing or persuasion for a continued adherence that do not employ physical coercion or threat of same are protected by the free exercise of religion clause of the First Amendment against action of state laws or by state officials. The claim of free exercise may not be overcome by the contention that &apos;brainwashing&apos; or &apos;mind control&apos; has been used, in the absence of evidence that the above standards have been violated. ] In the 1980s in the United States, namely in New York (Deprogramming Bill, 1981), Kansas (Deprogramming Bill, 1982), and Nebraska (conservatorship legislation for 1985), lawmakers unsuccessfully attempted to legalize involuntary deprogramming. Rev. Sun Myung Moon, founder of the Unification Church (many of whose members were targets of deprogramming) issued this statement in 1983: [ The methods involved in &quot; deprogramming &quot; are like those used in Communist concentration camps. Using parents and relatives to entrap members, &quot; deprogrammers &quot; commit grown adults to mental hospitals with the supposed &quot; illness &quot; of holding of a minority religious belief. Other typical deprogramming techniques include kidnapping, illegal detention, violence, psychological harassment, sleep deprivation, inducement to use alcohol and drugs, sexual seduction and rape. By such threats, harassment and manipulation professional &quot; deprogrammers &quot; force members to renounce their faith. Many people are injured physically and psychologically because of this criminal activity. ] During the 1990s, deprogrammer Rick Ross was sued by Jason Scott, a former member of a Pentecostal group called the Life Tabernacle Church, after an unsuccessful deprogramming attempt. In 1995, the jury awarded Scott $875,000 in compensatory damages and $2,500,000 in punitive damages against Ross, which were later settled for $5,000 and 200 hours of services. More significantly, the jury also found that the leading anti-cult group known as the Cult Awareness Network was a co-conspirator in the crime and fined CAN $1,000,000 in punitive damages, forcing the group into bankruptcy. { www.censur.org, Scott vs. Ross, Workman, Simpson. Retrieved May 31, 2007. } This case is often seen as effectively closing the door on the practice of involuntary deprogramming in the United States. [ People and Places ] In the 1974 case of Kathy Crampton, whose abduction and deprogramming were televised nationally, she went back to the Love Family group several days after the apparently successful deprogramming. Patrick was charged for kidnapping, but he was acquitted with the reasoning: : &quot; [w]here parents are, as here, of the reasonable and intelligent belief that they were not physically capable of recapturing their daughter from existing, imminent danger, then the defense of necessity transfers or transposes to the constituted agent, the person who acts upon their belief under such conditions. Here that agent is the Defendant [Ted Patrick] &apos;&apos; (District Court of the United States 1974: 79; New York Times 1974). In 1980 Susan Wirth, a 35 year old teacher living in San Francisco, was abducted by her parents to be deprogramed from her leftist political views and activities. { Daughter kidnapped over politics, } { Beaver County Times, July 2, 1980, page a13 } Patrick was paid $27,000 to carry out the deprogramming, which involved handcuffing her to a bed for two weeks and denying her food. { Stephen Garrard Postpage, Inquiries in bioethics, 1993, Georgetwon University Press, ISBN 0-87840-538-0, ISBN 978-0-87840-538-1, page 71 } She was later released and after returning to San Francisco spoke out against deprograming but declined to press legal charges against her parents. { &quot; Feared kidnapped, she reconciles with mother &quot;, } { Merced Sun-Star, July 29, 1980 } In 1980, Patrick was convicted of conspiracy, kidnapping, and false imprisonment. These charges were related to the abduction and attempted deprogramming of Roberta McElfish, a 26-year-old Tucson waitress. [ Ted Patrick convicted of seizing woman said to have joined cult 1980-08-30 The New York Times ] Patrick was sentenced to one year in prison and fined five thousand dollars. [ Ted Patrick is sentenced in seizure of cult member 1980-09-27 The New York Times ] In 1981, Stephanie Riethmiller, who lived in Ohio, was kidnapped by deprogramers who where hired by her parents to remove her from a lesbian relationship. She was held against her will and repeatedly raped. After her release she filed civil charges against her parents and the deprogrammers, which were dismissed in a trial that generated some controversy in the media. { Violence Against Lesbians and Gay Men, Gary David Comstock, Columbia University Press (April 15, 1995)ISBN 0-231-07331-3ISBN 978-0-231-07331-8. page 201 } { &quot; Deprogrammed Woman Files Suit &quot;, Gadsten Times, 12-10-1981 } In 1990, Patrick attempted to deprogram Elma Miller, an Amish woman who had joined a liberal sect. He was hired by her husband to return her to him and the Amish church. Criminal charges of conspiracy were filed against Miller&apos;s husband, brother, and two others; but were later dropped on her request to the prosecuting attorney. { Amish Woman Charges Deprogramming, } { Pittsburg Press, November 30, 1990, page 8 } { Amish Woman Asks Prosecutor to Drop Charges on Kidnapping, } { Madison Courier &apos;&apos;, December 8, 1990, page 3 } [ Jason Scott case ] During the 1990s, Rick Ross, a noted cult intervention advocate who took part in a number of deprogramming sessions, was sued by Jason Scott, a former member of a Pentecostalist group called the Life Tabernacle Church, after an attempt at intervention after a forcible abduction was unsuccessful. The jury awarded Scott $875,000 in compensatory damages and $1,000,000 in punitive damages against the Cult Awareness Network (CAN), and $2,500,000 against Ross (later settled for $5,000 and 200 hours of services &quot; as an expert consultant and intervention specialist &quot; ). The jury held that Ross and his associates &quot; intentionally or recklessly acted in a way so outrageous in character and so extreme in degree as to go beyond all possible bounds of decency and to be regarded as atrocious and utterly intolerable in a civilized community. &quot; { JASON SCOTT, PLAINTIFF v. RICK ROSS, A/K/A/ RICKEY ALLEN ROSS, MARK WORKMAN, CHARLES SIMPSON, CULT AWARENESS NETWORK, A CALIFORNIA NONPROFIT CORPORATION AND JOHN DOE 1–JOHN DOE 20, DEFENDANTS. Case No. C94-00796. November 29, 1995 } [ Scott vs. Ross, Workman, Simpson, Cult Awareness Network: Verdict form (p. 5) http://www.cesnur.org/2001/CAN/02/01.htm 12 October 2008 ] In a note to the defendants United States District Judge John C. Coughenour concluded: &quot; Finally, the court notes each of the defendants&apos; seeming incapability of appreciating the maliciousness of their conduct towards Mr. Scott. Rather, throughout the entire course of this litigation, they have attempted to portray themselves as victims of Mr. Scott&apos;s counsel&apos;s alleged agenda. Thus, the large award given by the jury against both the CAN and Mr. Ross seems reasonably necessary to enforce the jury&apos;s determination on the oppressiveness of the defendants&apos; actions and deter similar conduct in the future. &quot; [ Shupe Anson Anson Shupe Darnell, Susan E. Agents of Discord Transaction Publishers 2006 New Brunswick (U.S.A.), London (UK) 180–184 0-7658-0323-2 ] Rick Ross later had his credentials questioned in 2011 in the case of State of Arizona v. James Arthur Ray. Rick Ross’ credentials as a witness and his criminal record were questioned by the defendant. { Case No. V1300CR201080049, Defendant James Arthur Ray’s Motion in Limine (No.9) To Exclude Testimony of Rick Ross http://www.scribd.com/llgattruth/d/53037268-State-of-Arizona-v-James-Arthur-Ray-Case-No-V1300CR201080049-Defendant-James-Arthur-Ray%E2%80%99s-Motion-in-Limine-No-9-To-Exclude-Testimony-of-Rick-Ros } [ Deprogramming and exit counseling ] Steve Hassan, author of the book Combatting Cult Mind Control, states that he took part in a number of deprogrammings in the late 1970s, and has spoken out against them since 1980. { Refuting the Disinformation Attacks Put Forth by Destructive Cults and their Agents, by Steven Hassan } Hassan states that he has not participated in any deprogrammings since then, even though page 114 of Combatting, Hassan states that deprogrammings can be kept as last resort if all other attempts fail. He is one of the major proponents of exit counseling as a form of intervention therapy, and he refers to his method as &quot; strategic intervention therapy. &quot; Deprogramming and exit counseling, sometimes seen as one and the same, are distinct approaches to helping a person to leave a cult. Some people blur the distinctions on purpose: some practitioners do so to avoid criticism; some opponents do so to intensify criticism. Proponents of the distinction, however, state that deprogramming entails coercion and confinement. In exit counseling the cult member is free to leave at any time. Deprogramming typically costs $10,000 or more, mainly because of the expense of a security team. Exit counseling typically costs $2,000 to $4,000, including expenses, for a three-to-five day intervention, although cases requiring extensive research of little-known groups can cost much more. Deprogramming, especially when it fails, entails considerable legal and psychological risk (for example, a permanent alienation of the cultist from his or her family). The psychological and legal risks in exit counseling are much smaller. Although deprogrammers prepare families for the process, exit counselors tend to work more closely with families and expect them to contribute more to the process; that is, exit counseling requires that families establish a reasonable and respectful level of communication with their loved one before the exit counseling proper can begin. Because they rely on coercion, which is illegal except in the case of conservatorship and is generally viewed as unethical, deprogrammers&apos; critiques of the unethical practices of cults will tend to have less credibility with cult members than the critiques of exit counselors. [ In popular culture ] Holy Smoke! 1999 movie based on the book with the same name Split Image 1982 movie about deprogramming [ See also ] Anti-cult movement Exit counseling Mind control Intervention (counseling) [ References ] [ Notes ] [ Bibliography ] Conway, Flo &amp; Jim Siegelman, Snapping (1978), excerpt ISBN 0-9647650-0-4 Colombrito v. Kelly, 764 F.2d 122 (2d Cir. 1985) Dubrow-Eichel, Steve K., Ph.D.: Deprogramming: A Case Study, Cultic Studies Journal Stephen A. Kent and Josef Szimhart : Exit Counseling and the Decline of Deprogramming., Cultic Studies Review 1 No.3, 2002 Langone, Michael : Deprogramming, Exit Counseling, and Ethics, Clarifying the Confusion, Christian Research Institute Journal, 1993 Melton, Gordon, J. &quot; Brainwashing &quot; : Career of a Myth in the United States and Europe,. Le Moult J. (1978), Deprograrnming members of religious sects, Fordham Law Review, 46, pp.  599–640. Ross, Rick: A brief history of cult intervention work, 1999 Szimhart, Joseph: Persistence of &quot; Deprogramming &quot; Stereotypes in Film, Cultic Studies Journal, 3/2 2004 Deprogramming, Exit Counseling, and Ethics: Clarifying the Confusion - by Michael D. Langone and Paul R. Martin, from the Viewpoint column of the Christian Research Journal, Winter 1993, page 46. [ External links ] Apologetics Index Collection of research resources on religious cults, sects, world religions, doctrines, and related issues. While operated from an evangelical Christian perspective, the entries also include links to material from a variety of viewpoints. Brainwashing and Mind Control Controversies - Center for Studies on New Religions Center for Freedom of Mind - espouses &quot; mind control &quot; idea Brainwashing and Deprogramming on Skeptoid Diane Benscoter on how cults rewire the brain Deprogramming on xFamily.org, a wiki about the Family International cult Religion News Blog Up-to-date news about religious cults, sects, world religions, and related issues. The Oracle of Ifa and the Verdict of the Court: A failed attempt to deprogram from the African &quot; Ifa &quot; religion article by Wim Haan (see Ifá religion ) Deprogramming Article in Unification Church sponsored wiki-encyclopedia. Category:Human rights abuses Category:Religious persecution Category:Disengagement from religion Category:Anti-cult terms and concepts * Category:Mind control methods cs:Deprogramování fr:Deprogramming nl:Deprogrammeur no:Deprogrammering ru:Депрограммирование sr:Депрограмирање