[ May 2011 ] [ the French commune the Bible translation Douay-Rheims Bible ] [ Douai Nord-Pas-de-Calais Nord Douai 59178 59500 Jacques Vernier 2001 –2008 Douaisis 42796 1999 3.08 50.3714 24 16 38 16.88 ] Douai ( Dutch : Dowaai) is a commune in the Nord département in northern France. It is a sub-prefecture of the department. Located on the river Scarpe some 40  km from Lille and 25  km from Arras, Douai is home to one of the region&apos;s most impressive belfries. The population of the metropolitan area, including Lens, was 552,682 in 1999. [ Economy ] The main industries in the town are in the chemical and metal engineering sectors. Renault has a large vehicle assembly plant near the town, which has produced many well known Renault vehicles, such as the R14, R11, R19, and the Megane and Scenic of today. [ Transport ] The Gare de Douai railway station is served by regional trains towards Lille, Amiens, Saint-Quentin and Valenciennes. [ History ] { Jean-Baptiste Camille Corot } Its site probably corresponds to that of a 4th century Roman fortress known as Duacum. From 10th century the town was a romance fiefdom of the counts of Flanders. The town became a flourishing textile market centre during the Middle Ages, historically known as Douay or Doway in English. In 1384, the county of Flanders passed into the domains of the Dukes of Burgundy and thence in 1477 into Habsburg possessions. In 1667, Douai was taken by the troops of Louis XIV of France, and by the 1668 Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle, the town was ceded to France. During successive sieges from 1710 to 1712, Douai was almost completely destroyed. [ November 2010 ] By 1713, the town was fully integrated into France. Douai became the seat of the Parliament of Flanders. Apart from the ferment of the French Revolution, it was again caught up in hostilities in World War I, and in 1918, the town was partly burned, while World War II also brought considerable damage to Douai. The town is still a transportation and commercial center for the area, which is known for its coalfield, the richest in northern France. { Vimy Ridge } [ Heraldry ] [ Blason Vide 3D.svg Arms of Douai The arms of Douai are blazon ed : Gules simple. ] thumb [ Main sights ] Douai&apos;s ornate Gothic style belfry was begun in 1380, on the site of an earlier tower. The 80  m high structure includes an impressive carillon, consisting of 62 bell s spanning 5 octaves. The originals, some dating from 1391 were removed in 1917 during World War I by the occupying German forces, who intended to melt them down for the metal. They were reinstalled after repairs in 1924, but 47 of them were replaced in 1954 to obtain a better sound. An additional larger bell in the summit, a La called &quot; Joyeuse &quot;, dates from 1471 and weighs 5.5 tonnes. The chimes are rung by a mechanism every quarter hour, but are also played via a keyboard on Saturday mornings and at certain other times. The substantial Porte de Valenciennes town gate, a reminder of the town&apos;s past military importance, was built in 1453. One face is built in Gothic style, while the other is of Classical design. [ University of Douai ] { University of Douai } { English College, Douai } [ Catholic studies ] The University of Douai was founded under the patronage of Phillip II, when Douai belonged to the Spanish Netherlands. It was prominent, from the 1560s until the French Revolution, as a centre for the education of English Catholics escaping the persecution in England. Connected with the University were not only the English College, Douai, founded by William Allen, but also the Irish and Scottish colleges and the Benedictine, Franciscan and Jesuit houses. The Benedictine priory of St Gregory the Great was founded by Saint John Roberts at Douai in 1605, with a handful of exiled English Benedictines who had entered various monasteries in Spain, as the first house after the Reformation to begin conventual life. The community was established within the English Benedictine Congregation and started a college for English Catholic boys who were unable to find a Catholic education at home, and pursued studies in the University of Douai. However, the community was expelled at the time of the French Revolution in 1793 and, after some years of wandering, finally settled at Downside Abbey, Somerset, in 1814. Another English Benedictine community, the Priory of St. Edmund, which had been formed in Paris in 1615 by Dom Gabriel Gifford, later Archbishop of Rheims and primate of France, was expelled from Paris during the Revolution, and eventually took over the vacant buildings of the community of St Gregory&apos;s in 1818. Later, following Waldeck-Rousseau &apos;s Law of Associations (1901), this community also returned to England in 1903, where it was established at Douai Abbey, near Reading. Douai School continued as an educational establishment for boys until 1999. In 1609 the English College published a translation of the Old Testament, which, together with the New Testament published at Rheims 27 years earlier, was the Douay-Rheims Bible used by Anglophone Roman Catholics almost exclusively for more than 300 years. For a time there was a Carthusian monastery (charterhouse) in Douai, which is now the Musée de la Chartreuse de Douai. [ Modern university ] Founded as University of Douai in 1562, the state university in Northern France was renamed Université impériale de Douai-Lille in 1808, then as Université de Lille with faculty expansion from Douai to Lille from mid-19th century onwards. Université Lille Nord de France - Artois University Douai Business School, established in 1991 École des Mines de Douai Nurse School [ Notable people ] Douai was the birthplace of: Giambologna, born as Jean Boulogne, sculptor Charles Alexandre de Calonne, statesman Marceline Desbordes-Valmore, poet Henri-Edmond Cross, pointillist painter Michel Warlop, jazz violinist André Obey, playwright Jacky Henin, politician and Member of the European Parliament [ Twin towns ] Douai is twinned with: [ United Kingdom ] [ Germany ] [ United States ] [ Burkina Faso ] [ Poland ] Harrow, United Kingdom Recklinghausen, Germany Kenosha, United States Dédougou, Burkina Faso Puławy, Poland [ References ] [ External links ] [ Douai ] [ Douai ] Douai official website (in French) Category:Communes of Nord (French department) Category:Subprefectures in France ar:دويه bg:Дуе br:Douai ca:Douai ceb:Douai cy:Douai de:Douai es:Douai eo:Douai eu:Douai fa:دوئه fr:Douai it:Douai sw:Douai la:Duacum ms:Douai nl:Dowaai ja:ドゥエー no:Douai nn:Douai oc:Douai pcd:Doué pl:Douai pt:Douai ro:Douai ru:Дуэ sk:Douai sl:Douai sr:Дуе (Север) sv:Douai uk:Дуе (Нор) vi:Douai vo:Douai war:Douai zh:杜埃