[ aspects of nutrition science not specific to humans Nutrition ] Human nutrition is the provision to obtain the materials necessary to support life. In general, people can survive for two to eight weeks without food, depending on stored body fat and muscle mass. Survival without water is usually limited to three or four days. Lack of food remains a serious problem, with about 36 million people dying every year from causes directly or indirectly related to hunger. { United Nations Information Service. “Independent Expert On Effects Of Structural Adjustment, Special Rapporteur On Right To Food Present Reports: Commission Continues General Debate On Economic, Social And Cultural Rights”. } { United Nations, March 29, 2004, p. 6. “Around 36 million people died from hunger directly or indirectly every year.”. } Childhood malnutrition is also common and contributes to the global burden of disease. [ Murray C, Lopez A Global mortality, disability, and the contribution of risk factors: Global Burden of Disease Study Lancet 349 9063 1436–42 1997 9164317 10.1016/S0140-6736(96)07495-8 ] However global food distribution is not equal, and obesity among some human populations has increased to almost epidemic proportions, leading to health complications and increased mortality in some developed, and a few developing countries. Obesity is caused by consuming more calorie s than are expended, with many attributing excessive weight gain to a combination of overeating of &quot; unhealthy &quot; (high fat, high sugar, high carbohydrate) foods and insufficient exercise. A major risk of obesity is becoming a type 2 diabetic. [ Overview ] Nutritional science investigates the metabolic and physiological responses of the body to diet. With advances in the fields of molecular biology, biochemistry, and genetics, the study of nutrition is increasingly concernedwith metabolism and metabolic pathway s : the sequences of biochemical steps through which substances in living things change from one form to another. The human body contains chemical compounds, such as water, carbohydrate s (sugar, starch, and fiber ), amino acids (in proteins ), fatty acids (in lipids ), and nucleic acids ( DNA and RNA ). These compounds in turn consist of elements such as carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, phosphorus, calcium, iron, zinc, magnesium, manganese, and so on. All of these chemical compounds and elements occur in various forms and combinations (e.g. hormones, vitamins, phospholipids, hydroxyapatite ), both in the human body and in the plant and animal organisms that humans eat. The human body consists of elements and compounds ingested, digested, absorbed, and circulated through the blood stream to feed the cell s of the body. Except in the unborn fetus, the digestive system is the first system involved [ August 2009 ]. In a typical adult, about seven liters of digestive juices enter the lumen of the digestive tract. [ January 2009 ] [ January 2009 ] These break chemical bonds in ingested molecules, and modulate their conformation s and energy states. Though some molecules are absorbed into the bloodstream unchanged, digestive processes release them from the matrix of foods. Unabsorbed matter, along with some waste products of metabolism, is eliminated from the body in the feces. Studies of nutritional status must take into account the state of the body before and after experiments, as well as the chemical composition of the whole diet and of all material excreted and eliminated from the body (in urine and feces). Comparing the food to the waste can help determine the specific compounds and elements absorbed and metabolized in the body. The effects of nutrients may only be discernible over an extended period, during which all food and waste must be analyzed. The number of variables involved in such experiment s is high, making nutritional studies time-consuming and expensive, which explains why the science of human nutrition is still slowly evolving. [ Nutrients ] [ Nutrient ] There are seven major classes of nutrients: carbohydrates, fat s, dietary fibre, minerals, protein, vitamin, and water. These nutrient classes can be categorized as either macronutrients (needed in relatively large amounts) or micronutrients (needed in smaller quantities). The macronutrients are carbohydrates, fats, fibre, proteins, and water. The micronutrients are minerals and vitamins. The macronutrients (excluding fibre and water) provide structural material (amino acids from which proteins are built, and lipids from which cell membranes and some signaling molecules are built), energy. Some of the structural material can be used to generate energy internally, and in either case it is measured in Joule s or kilocalories (often called &quot; Calories &quot; and written with a capital C to distinguish them from little &apos;c&apos; calories). Carbohydrates and proteins provide 17  kJ approximately (4  kcal) of energy per gram, while fats provide 37  kJ (9  kcal) per gram, [ Berg J, Tymoczko JL, Stryer L Biochemistry W.H. Freeman 5th San Francisco 2002 0-7167-4684-0 603 ] though the net energy from either depends on such factors as absorption and digestive effort, which vary substantially from instance to instance. Vitamins, minerals, fiber, and water do not provide energy, but are required for other reasons. A third class dietary material, fiber (i.e., non-digestible material such as cellulose), seems also to be required, for both mechanical and biochemical reasons, though the exact reasons remain unclear. Molecules of carbohydrates and fats consist of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen atoms. Carbohydrates range from simple monosaccharides (glucose, fructose, galactose) to complex polysaccharides (starch). Fats are triglyceride s, made of assorted fatty acid monomers bound to glycerol backbone. Some fatty acids, but not all, are essential in the diet: they cannot be synthesized in the body. Protein molecules contain nitrogen atoms in addition to carbon, oxygen, and hydrogen. The fundamental components of protein are nitrogen-containing amino acids, some of which are essential in the sense that humans cannot make them internally. Some of the amino acids are convertible (with the expenditure of energy) to glucose and can be used for energy production just as ordinary glucose. By breaking down existing protein, some glucose can be produced internally; the remaining amino acids are discarded, primarily as urea in urine. This occurs naturally when atrophy takes place, or during periods of starvation. Other micronutrients include antioxidants and phytochemicals which are said to influence (or protect) some body systems. Their necessity is not as well established as in the case of, for instance, vitamins. Most foods contain a mix of some or all of the nutrient classes, together with other substances such as toxins or various sorts. Some nutrients can be stored internally (e.g., the fat soluble vitamins), while others are required more or less continuously. Poor health can be caused by a lack of required nutrients or, in extreme cases, too much of a required nutrient. For example, both salt and water (both absolutely required) will cause illness or even death in too large amounts. [ Carbohydrates ] [ Carbohydrate ] { Grain products: rich sources of complex and simple carbohydrates } Carbohydrates may be classified as monosaccharide s, disaccharide s, or polysaccharide s depending on the number of monomer (sugar) units they contain. They constitute a large part of foods such as rice, noodles, bread, and other grain -based products. Monosaccharides contain one sugar unit, disaccharides two, and polysaccharides three or more. Polysaccharides are often referred to as complex carbohydrates because they are typically long multiple branched chains of sugar units. The difference is that complex carbohydrates take longer to digest and absorb since their sugar units must be separated from the chain before absorption. The spike in blood glucose levels after ingestion of simple sugars is thought to be related to some of the heart and vascular diseases which have become more frequent in recent times. Simple sugars form a greater part of modern diets than formerly, perhaps leading to more cardiovascular disease. The degree of causation is still not clear, however. Simple carbohydrates are absorbed quickly, and therefore raise blood-sugar levels more rapidly than other nutrients. However, the most important plant carbohydrate nutrient, starch, varies in its absorption. Gelatinized starch (starch heated for a few minutes in the presence of water) is far more digestible than plain starch. And starch which has been divided into fine particles is also more absorbable during digestion. The increased effort and decreased availability reduces the available energy from starchy foods substantially and can be seen experimentally in rats and anecdotally in humans. Additionally, up to a third of dietary starch may be unavailable due to mechanical or chemical difficulty. [ Fat ] [ Fat Nutrition#Fat ] A molecule of dietary fat typically consists of several fatty acid s (containing long chains of carbon and hydrogen atoms), bonded to a glycerol. They are typically found as triglyceride s (three fatty acids attached to one glycerol backbone). Fats may be classified as saturated or unsaturated depending on the detailed structure of the fatty acids involved. Saturated fats have all of the carbon atoms in their fatty acid chains bonded to hydrogen atoms, whereas unsaturated fats have some of these carbon atoms double-bonded, so their molecules have relatively fewer hydrogen atoms than a saturated fatty acid of the same length. Unsaturated fats may be further classified as monounsaturated (one double-bond) or polyunsaturated (many double-bonds). Furthermore, depending on the location of the double-bond in the fatty acid chain, unsaturated fatty acids are classified as omega-3 or omega-6 fatty acids. Trans fats are a type of unsaturated fat with trans-isomer bonds; these are rare in nature and in foods from natural sources; they are typically created in an industrial process called (partial) hydrogenation. Many studies have shown that unsaturated fats, particularly monounsaturated fats, are best in the human diet. Saturated fats, typically from animal sources, are next, while trans fats are to be avoided. Saturated and some trans fats are typically solid at room temperature (such as butter or lard ), while unsaturated fats are typically liquids (such as olive oil or flaxseed oil ). Trans fats are very rare in nature, but have properties useful in the food processing industry, such as rancid resistance. [ July 2008 ] [ Essential fatty acids ] [ Essential fatty acids ] Most fatty acids are non-essential, meaning the body can produce them as needed, generally from other fatty acids and always by expending energy to do so. However, in humans at least two fatty acids are essential and must be included in the diet. An appropriate balance of essential fatty acids -— omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids -— seems also important for health, though definitive experimental demonstration has been elusive. Both of these &quot; omega &quot; long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids are substrates for a class of eicosanoids known as prostaglandins, which have roles throughout the human body. They are hormone s, in some respects. The omega-3 eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), which can be made in the human body from the omega-3 essential fatty acid alpha-linolenic acid (LNA), or taken in through marine food sources, serves as a building block for series 3 prostaglandins (e.g. weakly inflammatory PGE3). The omega-6 dihomo-gamma-linolenic acid (DGLA) serves as a building block for series 1 prostaglandins (e.g. anti-inflammatory PGE1), whereas arachidonic acid (AA) serves as a building block for series 2 prostaglandins (e.g. pro-inflammatory PGE 2). Both DGLA and AA can be made from the omega-6 linoleic acid (LA) in the human body, or can be taken in directly through food. An appropriately balanced intake of omega-3 and omega-6 partly determines the relative production of different prostaglandins: one reason a balance between omega-3 and omega-6 is believed important for cardiovascular health. In industrialized societies, people typically consume large amounts of processed vegetable oils, which have reduced amounts of the essential fatty acids along with too much of omega-6 fatty acids relative to omega-3 fatty acids. Omega-3 EPA prevents fat from being released from the wild, thereby skewing prostaglandin balance away from pro-inflammatory PGE2 (made from AA) toward fat PGE1 (made from DGLA). Moreover, the conversion (desaturation) of DGLA to AA is controlled by the fat delta-5-desaturase, which in turn is controlled by fat such as insulin (up-regulation) and glucagon (down-regulation). The amount and type of carbohydrates consumed, along with some types of fat, can influence processes involving insulin, glucagon, and other hormones; therefore the ratio of omega-3 versus fat has wide effects on general health, and specific effects on immune function and inflammation, and mitosis (i.e. cell division). Good sources of essential fatty acids include most vegetables, nut s, seeds, and marine oils, Some of the best sources are fish, flax seed oils, soy bean s, pumpkin seed s, sunflower seed s, and walnut s. [ Fiber ] [ Dietary fiber ] Dietary fiber is a carbohydrate (or a polysaccharide) that is incompletely absorbed in humans and in some animals. Like all carbohydrates, when it is metabolized it can produce four calories (kilocalories) of energy per gram. But in most circumstances it accounts for less than that because of its limited absorption and digestibility. Dietary fiber consists mainly of cellulose, a large carbohydrate polymer that is indigestible because humans do not have the required enzymes to disassemble it. There are two subcategories: soluble and insoluble fiber. Whole grains, fruits (especially plum s, prune s, and fig s ), and vegetables are good sources of dietary fiber. Fiber is important to digestive health and is thought to reduce the risk of colon cancer. [ April 2009 ] For mechanical reasons it can help in alleviating both constipation and diarrhea. Fiber provides bulk to the intestinal contents, and insoluble fiber especially stimulates peristalsis -- the rhythmic muscular contractions of the intestines which move digesta along the digestive tract. Some soluble fibers produce a solution of high viscosity; this is essentially a gel, which slows the movement of food through the intestines. Additionally, fiber, perhaps especially that from whole grains, may help lessen insulin spikes and reduce the risk of type 2 diabetes. [ Protein ] { meats such as } { chicken contain all the } { essential amino acids needed for humans } [ Protein in nutrition ] Proteins are the basis of many animal body structures (e.g. muscles, skin, and hair). They also form the enyzmes which catalyse chemical reactions throughout the body. Each molecule is composed of amino acids which are characterized by containing nitrogen and sometimes sulphur (these components are responsible for the distinctive smell of burning protein, such as the keratin in hair). The body requires amino acids to produce new proteins (protein retention) and to replace damaged proteins (maintenance). Amino acids are soluble in the digestive juices within the small intestine, where they are absorbed into the blood. Once absorbed they cannot be stored in the body, so they are either metabolised as required or excreted. Excess amino acids are excreted in the urine. For all animals, some amino acids are essential (an animal cannot produce them internally) and some are non-essential (the animal can produce them from other amino acids). Twenty two amino acids can be found in the human body, and about ten of these are essential, and therefore must be included in the diet. A diet that contains adequate amounts of amino acids (especially those that are essential) is particularly important in some situations: during early development and maturation, pregnancy, lactation, or injury (a burn, for instance). A complete protein source contains all the essential amino acids; an incomplete protein source lacks one or more of the essential amino acids. It is a common misconception that a vegetarian diet will be insufficient in essential proteins; both vegetarians and vegans of any age and gender, with a healthy diet, can flourish throughout all stages of life, although the latter group typically need to pay more interest in their nutrition than the former. { Rice and beans, incomplete individually, together form a complete protein. } It is possible to combine two incomplete protein sources (e.g. rice and beans ) to make a complete protein source, even when not eaten together. Sources of dietary protein include meat s, tofu and other soy -products, eggs, grain s, legume s, and dairy product s such as milk and cheese. A few amino acids from protein can be converted into glucose and used for fuel through a process called gluconeogenesis; this is done in quantity only during starvation. The amino acids remaining after such conversion are discarded. [ Minerals ] [ Dietary mineral ] Dietary minerals are the chemical element s required by living organisms, other than the four elements carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, and oxygen that are present in nearly all organic molecules. The term &quot; mineral &quot; is archaic, since the intent is to describe simply the less common elements in the diet. Some are heavier than the four just mentioned—including several metals, which often occur as ions in the body. Some dietitians recommend that these be supplied from foods in which they occur naturally, or at least as complex compounds, or sometimes even from natural inorganic sources (such as calcium carbonate from ground oyster shells). Some are absorbed much more readily in the ionic forms found in such sources. On the other hand, minerals are often artificially added to the diet as supplements; the most famous is likely iodine in iodized salt which prevents goiter. A low sodium diet is beneficial for people with high blood pressure. A Cochrane review published in 2008 concluded that a long term (more than 4 weeks) low sodium diet in Caucasians has a useful effect to reduce blood pressure, both in people with hypertension and in people with normal blood pressure. { He FJ, MacGregor GA. Effect of longer-term modest salt reduction on blood pressure. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2004, Issue 1. Art. No.: CD004937. } [ 10.1002/14651858.CD004937 ] {. } The DASH diet (Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension) is a diet promoted by the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (part of the NIH, a United States government organization) to control hypertension. A major feature of the plan is limiting intake of sodium, and it also generally encourages the consumption of nuts, whole grains, fish, poultry, fruits and vegetables while lowering the consumption of red meats, sweets, and sugar. It is also &quot; rich in potassium, magnesium, and calcium, as well as protein &quot;. [ http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/public/heart/hbp/dash/new_dash.pdf Your Guide To Lowering Your Blood Pressure With DASH PDF 2009-06-08 ] [ Essential dietary minerals ] Many elements are essential in relative quantity; they are usually called &quot; bulk minerals &quot; requiring daily milligram quantities. Some are structural, but many play a role as electrolyte s. [ Nelson, D. L.; Cox, M. M. Lehninger Principles of Biochemistry 3rd Worth Publishing New York 2000 1-57259-153-6 ] Elements with recommended dietary allowance ( RDA ) greater than 200  mg/day are, in alphabetical order (with informal or folk-medicine perspectives in parentheses): [ D. E. C. Corbridge Phosphorus: An Outline of its Chemistry, Biochemistry, and Technology 5th Elsevier Amsterdam 1995 0-444-89307-5 ] Calcium, a common electrolyte, but also needed structurally (for muscle and digestive system health, bones, some forms neutralizes acidity, may help clear toxins, and provide signaling ions for nerve and membrane functions) Chlorine as chloride ions; very common electrolyte; see sodium, below Magnesium, required for processing ATP and related reactions (builds bone, causes strong peristalsis, increases flexibility, increases alkalinity) Phosphorus, required component of bones; essential for energy processing Potassium, a very common electrolyte (heart and nerve health) Sodium, a very common electrolyte; not generally found in dietary supplements, despite being needed in large quantities, because the ion is very common in food: typically as sodium chloride, or common salt [ Trace minerals ] Many elements are required in smaller amounts (microgram quantities), usually because they play a catalytic role in enzymes. [ Lippard, S. J. and Berg, J. M. Principles of Bioinorganic Chemistry University Science Books Mill Valley, CA 1994 0-935702-73-3 ] Some trace mineral elements (RDA &lt; 200  mg/day) are, in alphabetical order: Cobalt required for biosynthesis of vitamin B 12 family of coenzyme s Copper required component of many redox enzymes, including cytochrome c oxidase Chromium required for sugar metabolism Iodine required not only for the biosynthesis of thyroxin, but probably, for other important organs as breast, stomach, salivary glands, thymus etc. (see Extrathyroidal iodine ); for this reason iodine is needed in larger quantities than others in this list, and sometimes classified with the macrominerals Iron required for many enzymes, and for hemoglobin and some other proteins Manganese (processing of oxygen) Molybdenum required for xanthine oxidase and related oxidases Nickel present in urease Selenium required for peroxidase (antioxidant proteins) Zinc required for several enzymes such as carboxypeptidase, liver alcohol dehydrogenase, carbonic anhydrase [ Vitamins ] [ Vitamin ] As with the minerals discussed above, some vitamins are recognized as essential nutrients, necessary in the diet for good health. ( Vitamin D is the exception: it can alternatively be synthesized in the skin, in the presence of UVB radiation.) Certain vitamin-like compounds that are recommended in the diet, such as carnitine, are thought useful for survival and health, but these are not &quot; essential &quot; dietary nutrients because the human body has some capacity to produce them from other compounds. Moreover, thousands of different phytochemicals have recently been discovered in food (particularly in fresh vegetables), which may have desirable properties including antioxidant activity (see below); experimental demonstration has been suggestive but inconclusive. Other essential nutrients not classed as vitamins include essential amino acid s (see above ), choline, essential fatty acid s (see above ), and the minerals discussed in the preceding section. Vitamin deficiencies may result in disease conditions: goitre, scurvy, osteoporosis, impaired immune system, disorders of cell metabolism, certain forms of cancer, symptoms of premature aging, and poor psychological health (including eating disorders ), among many others. [ Shils et al. 2005 Modern Nutrition in Health and Disease Lippincott Williams and Wilkins 0-7817-4133-5 ] Excess of some vitamins is also dangerous to health (notably vitamin A ), and for at least one vitamin, B6, toxicity begins at levels not far above the required amount.Deficiency or excess of minerals can also have serious health consequences. [ Water ] [ Drinking water ] { water } { pump in } { China } About 70% of the non-fat mass of the human body is made of water. [ April 2008 ] To function properly, the body requires between one and seven liter s of water per day to avoid dehydration; the precise amount depends on the level of activity, temperature, humidity, and other factors. [ April 2008 ] With physical exertion and heat exposure, water loss increases and daily fluid needs will eventually increase as well. It is not fully clear how much water intake is needed by healthy people, although some experts assert that 8–10 glasses of water (approximately 2 liters) daily is the minimum to maintain proper hydration. [ http://www.bbc.co.uk/health/healthy_living/nutrition/drinks_water.shtml Healthy Water Living BBC 2007-02-01 ] The notion that a person should consume eight glasses of water per day cannot be traced to a credible scientific source. { &quot; Drink at least eight glasses of water a day. &quot; Really? Is there scientific evidence for &quot; 8 × 8 &quot; ? by Heinz Valdin, Department of Physiology, Dartmouth Medical School, Lebanon, } { New Hampshire } The effect of, greater or lesser, water intake on weight loss and on constipation is also still unclear. { Drinking Water - How Much?, Factsmart.org web site and references within } The original water intake recommendation in 1945 by the Food and Nutrition Board of the National Research Council read: &quot; An ordinary standard for diverse persons is 1 milliliter for each calorie of food. Most of this quantity is contained in prepared foods. &quot; { Food and Nutrition Board, National Academy of Sciences. Recommended Dietary Allowances, revised 1945. National Research Council, Reprint and Circular Series, No. 122, 1945 (Aug), p. 3-18. } The latest dietary reference intake report by the United States National Research Council recommended, generally, (including food sources): 2.7 liters of water total for women and 3.7 liters for men. { Dietary Reference Intakes: Water, Potassium, Sodium, Chloride, and Sulfate, Food and Nutrition Board } Specifically, pregnant and breastfeeding women need additional fluids to stay hydrated. According to the Institute of Medicine —who recommend that, on average, women consume 2.2 litres and men 3.0 litres —this is recommended to be 2.4 litres (approx. 9 cups) for pregnant women and 3 litres (approx. 12.5 cups) for breastfeeding women since an especially large amount of fluid is lost during nursing. [ http://www.mayoclinic.com/health/water/NU00283 Water: How much should you drink every day? - MayoClinic.com MayoClinic.com &lt; ! 2009-05-21 ] For those who have healthy kidneys, it is somewhat difficult to drink too much water, [ July 2008 ] but (especially in warm humid weather and while exercising) it is dangerous to drink too little. People can drink far more water than necessary while exercising, however, putting them at risk of water intoxication, which can be fatal. In particular large amounts of de-ionized water are dangerous. Normally, about 20 percent of water intake comes in food, while the rest comes from drinking water and assorted beverages ( caffeinated included). Water is excreted from the body in multiple forms; including urine and feces, sweat ing, and by water vapor in the exhaled breath. [ Phytochemicals ] Other food compounds include antioxidant phytochemicals. These substances are generally more recent discoveries which have not yet been recognized as vitamins or as required nutrients. Phytochemicals may act as antioxidants in vitro, but phytochemicals are not yet confirmed as dietary nutrients or in vivo antioxidants. [ December 2009 ] [ Antioxidants ] [ Antioxidant ] Antioxidants are a recent discovery. As cellular metabolism /energy production requires oxygen, potentially damaging (e.g. mutation causing) compounds known as free radicals can form. Most of these are oxidizers (i.e. acceptors of electrons) and some react very strongly. For normal cellular maintenance, growth, and division, these free radicals must be sufficiently neutralized by antioxidant compounds. Recently, some researchers suggested an interesting theory of evolution of dietary antioxidants. [ Venturi S, Donati FM, Venturi A, Venturi M Environmental iodine deficiency: A challenge to the evolution of terrestrial life? Thyroid 10 8 727–9 2000 11014322 10.1089/10507250050137851 ] [ Venturi S, Venturi M Evolution of Dietary Antioxidant Defences 2007 European Epi-Marker 11 3 1–12. http://www.icb–asbl.com/en/pdf/epimarker/epimarker_3_07.pdf ] [ Küpper FC, Carpenter LJ, McFiggans GB, et al. Iodide accumulation provides kelp with an inorganic antioxidant impacting atmospheric chemistry Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 105 19 6954–8 2008 18458346 2383960 10.1073/pnas.0709959105 Free full text ] Some are produced by the human body with adequate precursors ( glutathione, Vitamin C ) and those the body cannot produce may only be obtained in the diet via direct sources (Vitamin C in humans, Vitamin A, Vitamin K ) or produced by the body from other compounds, such as ( beta-carotene converted to Vitamin A by the body or Vitamin D synthesized from cholesterol by sunlight ). According to theory from in vitro science, phytochemicals (Section Below), especially a large subgroup of polyphenols, are the majority of potential dietary antioxidants; at least 4,000 polyphenols have such potential activity. Different antioxidants are theorized to function in a cooperative network, e.g. vitamin C can reactivate free radical-containing glutathione or vitamin E by accepting the free radical itself, and so on. Some antioxidants may be more effective than others at neutralizing different free radicals. Some may not neutralize certain free radicals. Some may not be present in certain areas of free radical development; for example, vitamin A is fat-soluble and so may protect lipid molecules. Vitamin C is water soluble and may also protect intracellular organelle s and lipid membranes. When interacting with a free radical, some antioxidants may produce a different free radical compound that is less dangerous or more dangerous than the previous compound. It is possible that having a variety of antioxidants allows any byproducts to be safely dealt with by more efficient antioxidants in neutralizing a free radical&apos;s butterfly effect, according to theory. [ Other compounds ] { Blackberries are a source of } { polyphenol antioxidant s } A growing area of interest is the effect upon human health of undefined natural compounds, collectively called phytochemicals. These compounds are typically found in edible plants, especially colorful fruits and vegetables, but also other organisms including seafood, algae, and fungi. One of the principal classes of phytochemicals are natural phenol s and polyphenol s, chemicals which might provide certain health benefits. In vitro, these chemicals inhibit the activity of reactive oxygen species which may be involved in certain diseases, but there remains no scientific evidence for the activity or benefit of polyphenols in the human body. A well-studied example phytochemical is zeaxanthin, a yellow-pigmented carotenoid present in many yellow and orange fruits and vegetables. Studies have shown a possible correlation between ingestion of zeaxanthin and age-related macular degeneration (AMD). [ 10.1001/jama.272.18.1413 Seddon JM, Ajani UA, Sperduto RD, et al. Dietary carotenoids, vitamins A, C, and E, and advanced age-related macular degeneration. Eye Disease Case-Control Study Group JAMA 272 18 1413–20 1994 November 7933422 ] { See http://www.mdsupport.org/library/zeaxanthin.html. } Less rigorous studies have proposed a correlation between zeaxanthin intake and cataracts. [ Lyle BJ, Mares-Perlman JA, Klein BE, Klein R, Greger JL Antioxidant intake and risk of incident age-related nuclear cataracts in the Beaver Dam Eye Study Am. J. Epidemiol. 149 9 801–9 1999 May 10221316 ] [ Yeum KJ, Taylor A, Tang G, Russell RM Measurement of carotenoids, retinoids, and tocopherols in human lenses Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 36 13 2756–61 1995 December 7499098 ] [ Chasan-Taber L, Willett WC, Seddon JM, et al. A prospective study of carotenoid and vitamin A intakes and risk of cataract extraction in US women Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 70 4 509–16 1999 October 10500020 ] [ Brown L, Rimm EB, Seddon JM, et al. A prospective study of carotenoid intake and risk of cataract extraction in US men Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 70 4 517–24 1999 October 10500021 ] A second carotenoid, lutein, has also been shown in preliminary studies to possibly affect AMD. Both compounds have been observed to collect in the retina following digestion and possibly to protect the rods and cones against intense light. Another pro-vitamin A carotenoid, beta- cryptoxanthin, may affect chronic joint inflammatory diseases, such as arthritis. While the association between blood levels of beta-cryptoxanthin and joint disease has been established in preliminary research, neither a convincing mechanism for such protection nor a cause-and-effect relationship exists. [ Pattison DJ, Symmons DP, Lunt M, et al. Dietary beta-cryptoxanthin and inflammatory polyarthritis: results from a population-based prospective study Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 82 2 451–5 2005 August 16087992 ] { Am J Epidemiology 2006 163(1). } Similarly, a red carotenoid, lycopene, has preliminary evidence for affecting prostate cancer. Even when the evidence is obtained, translating it to practical dietary advice can be difficult and counter-intuitive. Lutein, for example, occurs in many yellow and orange fruits and vegetables. Evidence has shown that the lutein present in egg yolk is more readily absorbed than the lutein from vegetable sources, possibly because of fat solubility. [ Handelman GJ, Nightingale ZD, Lichtenstein AH, Schaefer EJ, Blumberg JB Lutein and zeaxanthin concentrations in plasma after dietary supplementation with egg yolk Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 70 2 247–51 1999 August 10426702 ] As another example, lycopene is prevalent in tomatoes (and actually is the chemical that gives tomatoes their red color). It is released more effectively from cells in processed tomato products such as commercial pasta sauce or tomato soup, than in fresh intact tomatoes. Yet, such sauces tend to have high amounts of salt, sugar, other substances a person may wish or even need to avoid. The following table presents phytochemical groups and common sources, arranged by family: Family Sources Possible Lab Effect flavonoid s berries, herbs, vegetables, wine, grapes, tea general antioxidant isoflavone s ( phytoestrogens ) soy, red clover, kudzu root general antioxidant isothiocyanate s cruciferous vegetables detoxification enzyme s monoterpene s citrus peels, essential oil s, herbs, spices, green plants, atmosphere Monoterpenes are enormously widespread among green plant life (including algae ). Many plants, notably coniferous trees, emit beneficial monoterpenes into the atmosphere. potential anti-cancer effects organosulfur compounds chives, garlic, onion s possibly lower LDL s saponin s bean s, cereal s, herbs possible antioxidant capsaicinoid s all &apos;&apos;capiscum&apos;&apos; (chile) peppers possible topical pain relief, possible cancer cell apoptosis in vitro [ Intestinal bacterial flora ] [ Gut flora ] It is also known that human intestine s contain a large population of gut flora such as Bacteroides, L. acidophilus and E. coli, among many others. They are essential to digestion, and are also affected by the food eaten. Bacteria in the gut perform many important functions for humans, including breaking down and aiding in the absorption of otherwise indigestible food; stimulating cell growth; repressing the growth of harmful bacteria, training the immune system to respond only to pathogens; producing vitamin B 12, and defending against some infectious diseases. [ Advice and guidance ] [ United States Governmental policies ] { USDA } { food pyramid, published in 2005, is a general nutrition guide for recommended } { food consumption for } { humans. } In the US, dietitian s are registered (RD) or licensed (LD) with the Commission for Dietetic Registration and the American Dietetic Association, and are only able to use the title &quot; dietitian, &quot; as described by the business and professions codes of each respective state, when they have met specific educational and experiential prerequisites and passed a national registration or licensure examination, respectively. In California, registered dietitians must abide by the [ http://www.leginfo.ca.gov/cgi-bin/displaycode?section%3Dbpc%26amp%3Bgroup%3D02001-03000%26amp%3Bfile%3D2585-2586.8 Business and Professions Code of Section 2585-2586.8 ] Anyone may call themselves a nutritionist, including unqualified dietitians, as this term is unregulated. Some states, such as the State of Florida, have begun to include the title &quot; nutritionist &quot; in state licensure requirements. Most governments provide guidance on nutrition, and some also impose mandatory disclosure/labeling requirements for processed food manufacturers and restaurants to assist consumers in complying with such guidance. In the US, nutritional standards and recommendations are established jointly by the US Department of Agriculture and US Department of Health and Human Services. Dietary and physical activity guidelines from the USDA are presented in the concept of a food pyramid, which superseded the Four Food Groups. The Senate committee currently responsible for oversight of the USDA is the Agriculture, Nutrition and Forestry Committee. Committee hearings are often televised on C-SPAN as seen here. The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services provides a sample week-long menu which fulfills the nutritional recommendations of the government. { http://www.mypyramid.gov/downloads/sample_menu.pdf } Canada&apos;s Food Guide is another governmental recommendation. [ Teaching ] Nutrition is taught in schools in many countries. In England and Wales the Personal and Social Education and Food Technology curricula include nutrition, stressing the importance of a balanced diet and teaching how to read nutrition labels on packaging. In many schools a Nutrition class will fall within the Family and Consumer Science or Health departments. In some American schools, students are required to take a certain number of FCS or Health related classes. Nutrition is offered at many schools, and if it is not a class of its own, nutrition is included in other FCS or Health classes such as: Life Skills, Independent Living, Single Survival, Freshmen Connection, Health etc. In many Nutrition classes, students learn about the food groups, the food pyramid, Daily Recommended Allowances, calories, vitamins, minerals, malnutrition, physical activity, healthy food choices and how to live a healthy life. A 1985 US National Research Council report entitled Nutrition Education in US Medical Schools concluded that nutrition education in medical schools was inadequate. { Commission on Life Sciences. (1985). Nutrition Education in US Medical Schools, p. 4. National Academies Press. } Only 20% of the schools surveyed taught nutrition as a separate, required course. A 2006 survey found that this number had risen to 30%. [ Adams KM, Lindell KC, Kohlmeier M, Zeisel SH Status of nutrition education in medical schools, Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 83 4 941S–4S 2006 April 16600952 2430660 ] [ Healthy diets ] [ Healthy diet ] The United Healthcare / Pacificare nutrition guideline recommends the following foods per day to enhance your health (based on a 2,000 calorie diet) { Nutrition and diet - Making Better Dietary Decisions Daily Food Choices, Pacificare. Retrieved on 15 November 2010. } Grains: 6 oz per day &apos;Make half your grains whole&apos; Vegetables: 2.5 cups per day &apos;Vary your veggies&apos; Fruits: 2 cups per day &apos;Focus on fruits &apos; Milk: 3 cups per day &apos;Get your calcium-rich foods&apos; Meat and beans: 5.5 oz per day &apos;Go lean with protein&apos;. Heart disease, cancer, obesity, and diabetes are commonly called &quot; Western &quot; diseases because these maladies were once rarely seen in developing countries. One study in China found some regions had essentially no cancer or heart disease, while in other areas they reflected &quot; up to a 100-fold increase &quot; coincident with diets that were found to be entirely plant-based to heavily animal-based, respectively. [ Campbell T., Campbell T. The China Study Dallas Benella Books 2005 1-932100-38-5 ] In contrast, diseases of affluence like cancer and heart disease are common throughout the United States. Adjusted for age and exercise, large regional clusters of people in China rarely suffered from these &quot; Western &quot; diseases possibly because their diets are rich in vegetables, fruits and whole grains. A National Geographic cover article from November 2005, entitled The Secrets of Living Longer, looks into why certain populations have long life spans. [ November 2010 ] The article is a lifestyle survey of three populations, Sardinia ns, Okinawa ns, and Adventist s, who generally display longevity and &quot; suffer a fraction of the diseases that commonly kill people in other parts of the developed world, and enjoy more healthy years of life. &quot; In sum, they offer three sets of &apos;best practices&apos; to emulate. The rest is up to you. In common with all three groups is to follow a low-calorie diet that consist mainly of &quot; fruits, vegetables, and whole grains. &quot; [ November 2010 ] The National Geographic article noted that an NIH funded study of 34,000 Seventh-day Adventist s between 1976 and 1988 &quot;...found that the Adventists&apos; habit of consuming beans, soy milk, tomatoes, and other fruits lowered their risk of developing certain cancers. It also suggested that eating whole grain bread, drinking five glasses of water a day, and, most surprisingly, consuming four servings of nuts a week reduced their risk of heart disease. &quot; [ The French &quot; paradox &quot; ] [ French paradox ] It has been discovered that people living in France live longer. [ December 2009 ] Even though they consume more saturated fats than Americans, the rate of heart disease is lower in France than in North America. [ February 2010 ] A number of explanations have been suggested: [ Eckel RH, Borra S, Lichtenstein AH, Yin-Piazza SY Understanding the complexity of trans fatty acid reduction in the American diet: American Heart Association Trans Fat Conference 2006: report of the Trans Fat Conference Planning Group Circulation 115 16 2231–46 2007 April 17426064 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.181947 http://circ.ahajournals.org/cgi/reprint/115/16/2231 ] Reduced consumption of processed carbohydrate and other junk foods. Regular consumption of red wine. More active lifestyles involving plenty of daily exercise, especially walking; the French are much less dependent on cars than Americans. Higher consumption of artificially produced trans-fats by Americans, which has been shown to have greater lipoprotein effects per gram than saturated fat. However, statistics collected by the World Health Organization from 1990-2000 show that the incidence of heart disease in France may have been underestimated and in fact be similar to that of neighboring countries. [ Ducimetière P, Lang T, Amouyel P, Arveiler D, Ferrières J Why mortality from heart disease is low in France : Rates of coronary events are similar in France and southern Europe BMJ 320 7229 249–50 2000 January 10642245 1117444 10.1136/bmj.320.7229.249/a http://www.bmj.com/cgi/content/full/320/7229/249/a ] [ Sports nutrition ] [ Sports nutrition ] Individuals with highly active lifestyles require more nutrients. [ Protein ] { bodybuilding supplement. } Protein is an important component of every cell in the body. Hair and nails are mostly made of protein. The body uses protein to build and repair tissues. Also protein is used to make enzymes, hormones, and other body chemicals. Protein is an important building block of bones, muscles, cartilage, skin, and blood. The protein requirement for each individual differs, as do opinions about whether and to what extent physically active people require more protein. The 2005 Recommended Dietary Allowance s (RDA), aimed at the general healthy adult population, provide for an intake of 0.8 - 1  grams of protein per kilogram of body weight (according to the BMI formula), with the review panel stating that &quot; no additional dietary protein is suggested for healthy adults undertaking resistance or endurance exercise &quot;. [ Di Pasquale Mauro G. Sports Nutrition: Energy metabolism and exercise Ira Wolinsky, Judy A. Driskell CRC Press 2008 73 Utilization of Proteins in Energy Metabolism Mauro Di Pasquale 978-0-8493-7950-5 ] Conversely, Di Pasquale (2008), citing recent studies, recommends a minimum protein intake of 2.2 g/kg &quot; for anyone involved in competitive or intense recreational sports who wants to maximize lean body mass but does not wish to gain weight &quot;. [ Di Pasquale Mauro G. Sports Nutrition: Energy metabolism and exercise Ira Wolinsky, Judy A. Driskell CRC Press 2008 79 Utilization of Proteins in Energy Metabolism Mauro Di Pasquale 978-0-8493-7950-5 ] [ Water and salts ] Water is one of the most important nutrients in the sports diet. It helps eliminate food waste products in the body, regulates body temperature during activity and helps with digestion. Maintaining hydration during periods of physical exertion is key to peak performance. While drinking too much water during activities can lead to physical discomfort, dehydration in excess of 2% of body mass (by weight) markedly hinders athletic performance. { http://www.winforum.org/GamePlan-bw.pdf. page 19 } Water and salt dosage is based on work performed, lean body mass, and environmental factors, especially ambient temperature and humidity. Maintaining the right amount is key. Additional carbohydrates and protein taken before, during, and after exercise will improve endurance (increase time to exhaustion) as well as speed recovery as long as the exercise is compatible with digestion of the substance taken, e.g. a steak eaten while running a marathon may not be fully digested and may hinder performance. [ Carbohydrates ] The main fuel used by the body during exercise is carbohydrates, which is stored in muscle as glycogen—a form of sugar. During exercise, muscle glycogen reserves can be used up, especially when activities last longer than 90  min. [ February 2007 ] Because the amount of glycogen stored in the body is limited, it is important for athletes to replace glycogen by consuming a diet high in carbohydrates. Meeting energy needs can help improve performance during the sport, as well as improve overall strength and endurance. There are different kinds of carbohydrates: simple (for example from fruits) and complex (for example from grains such as wheat). Simple sugars can be from an unrefined natural source, or may be refined and added to processed food. A typical American consumes about 50% of their carbohydrates as refined sugars. Over the course of a year, the average American consumes 54 gallons of soft drinks, which contain the highest amount of added sugars. [ William D. McArdle, Frank I. Katch, Victor L. Katch Exercise Physiology: Energy, Nutrition, and Human Performance Lippincott Williams &amp; Wilkins 2006 0-8121-0682-2 ] Even though carbohydrates are necessary for humans to function, they are not all equally healthful. When machinery has been used to remove bits of high fiber, the carbohydrates are refined. These are the carbohydrates found in white bread and fast food. [ http://www.bbc.co.uk/health/healthy_living/nutrition/basics_carbos.shtml Nutrition — Healthy eating: Bread, cereals and other starchy foods BBC July 2008 2008-11-09 ] [ Malnutrition ] [ Malnutrition ] Malnutrition refers to insufficient, excessive, or imbalanced consumption of nutrients. In developed countries, the diseases of malnutrition are most often associated with nutritional imbalances or excessive consumption.Although there are more people in the world who are malnourished due to excessive consumption, according to the United Nations World Health Organization, the real challenge in developing nations today, more than starvation, is combating insufficient nutrition — the lack of nutrients necessary for the growth and maintenance of vital functions. [ Illnesses caused by improper nutrient consumption ] [ March 2011 ] [ February 2012 ] [ L Winkler Schlag B, Kessner C, Maess J, Dargel R. Development of brain lipids in rats receiving a fat-free diet with respect to myelinization Acta Biol Med Ger 1980 39 11–12 1197–203 7245988 http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7245988 ] [ March 2011 ] [ Haque ZU Mozaffar Z. Importance of dietary cholesterol for the maturation of mouse brain myelin Biosci Biotechnol Biochem 1992 56 8 1351–4 1369207 http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/1369207 10.1271/bbb.56.1351 ] [ March 2011 ] [ February 2012 ] Nutrients Deficiency Excess Energy starvation, marasmus obesity, diabetes mellitus, cardiovascular disease Simple carbohydrates none diabetes mellitus, obesity Complex carbohydrates none obesity Saturated fat low sex hormone levels http://deepfitness.com/705/The-Big-T-How-Your-Lifestyle-Influences-Your-Testosterone-Levels.aspx cardiovascular disease Trans fat none cardiovascular disease Unsaturated fat none obesity Fat malabsorption of fat-soluble vitamins, rabbit starvation (if protein intake is high), during development: stunted brain development and reduced brain weight. cardiovascular disease Omega-3 fats cardiovascular disease bleeding, hemorrhages Omega-6 fats none cardiovascular disease, cancer Cholesterol during development: deficiencies in myelinization of the brain. cardiovascular disease Protein kwashiorkor rabbit starvation Sodium hyponatremia hypernatremia, hypertension Iron anemia cirrhosis, cardiovascular disease Iodine goiter, hypothyroidism Iodine toxicity (goiter, hypothyroidism) Vitamin A xerophthalmia and night blindness, low testosterone levels hypervitaminosis A (cirrhosis, hair loss) Vitamin B 1 beriberi Vitamin B 2 cracking of skin and corneal unclearation Niacin pellagra dyspepsia, cardiac arrhythmias, birth defects Vitamin B 12 pernicious anemia Vitamin C scurvy diarrhea causing dehydration Vitamin D rickets hypervitaminosis D (dehydration, vomiting, constipation) Vitamin E nervous disorders hypervitaminosis E (anticoagulant: excessive bleeding) Vitamin K hemorrhage Calcium osteoporosis, tetany, carpopedal spasm, laryngospasm, cardiac arrhythmia s fatigue, depression, confusion, anorexia, nausea, vomiting, constipation, pancreatitis, increased urination Magnesium hypertension weakness, nausea, vomiting, impaired breathing, and hypotension Potassium hypokalemia, cardiac arrhythmia s hyperkalemia, palpitations [ Mental agility ] [ Nootropic ] Research indicates that improving the awareness of nutritious meal choices and establishing long-term habits of healthy eating has a positive effect on a cognitive and spatial memory capacity, potentially increasing a student&apos;s potential to process and retain academic information. Some organizations have begun working with teachers, policymakers, and managed foodservice contractors to mandate improved nutritional content and increased nutritional resources in school cafeterias from primary to university level institutions. Health and nutrition have been proven to have close links with overall educational success. [ The impact of health and nutrition on education Jere R. Behrman World Bank Research Observer 11 1 23–37 1996 ] Currently less than 10% of American college students report that they eat the recommended five servings of fruit and vegetables daily. [ 10.3200/JACH.55.4.195-206 American College Health Association American College Health Association National College Health Assessment Spring 2006 Reference Group data report (abridged) J Am Coll Health 55 4 195–206 2007 17319325 ] Better nutrition has been shown to have an impact on both cognitive and spatial memory performance; a study showed those with higher blood sugar levels performed better on certain memory tests. [ 10.1016/0301-0511(92)90032-P Benton D, Sargent J Breakfast, blood glucose and memory Biol Psychol 33 2–3 207–10 1992 July 1525295 ] In another study, those who consumed yogurt performed better on thinking tasks when compared to those who consumed caffeine free diet soda or confections. [ 10.1016/0195-6663(90)90051-9 Kanarek RB, Swinney D Effects of food snacks on cognitive performance in male college students Appetite 14 1 15–27 1990 February 2310175 ] Nutritional deficiencies have been shown to have a negative effect on learning behavior in mice as far back as 1951. [ Whitley JR, O&apos;Dell BL, Hogan AG Effect of diet on maze learning in second generation rats; folic acid deficiency J. Nutr. 45 1 153–60 1951 September 14880969 ] [ Umezawa M, Kogishi K, Tojo H, et al. High-linoleate and high-alpha-linolenate diets affect learning ability and natural behavior in SAMR1 mice J. Nutr. 129 2 431–7 1999 February 10024623 ] &quot; Better learning performance is associated with diet induced effects on learning and memory ability &quot;. The &quot; nutrition-learning nexus &quot; demonstrates the correlation between diet and learning and has application in a higher education setting. [ 10.1016/S0047-2727(00)00118-3 Glewwe P, Jacoby H, King E Early childhood nutrition and academic achievement: A longitudinal analysis Journal of Public Economics 81 3 345–68 2001 ] &quot; We find that better nourished children perform significantly better in school, partly because they enter school earlier and thus have more time to learn but mostly because of greater learning productivity per year of schooling. &quot; 91% of college students feel that they are in good health while only 7% eat their recommended daily allowance of fruits and vegetables. [ Guernsey L Many colleges clear their tables of steak, substitute fruit and pasta Chronicle of Higher Education 39 26 A30 1993 ] Nutritional education is an effective and workable model in a higher education setting. Managed food service contractors react quickly to the demands of their clients achievement: A longitudinal analysis. Journal of Public Economics, 81(3), 345-368. [ Duster T, Waters A Engaged learning across the curriculum: The vertical integration of food for thought Liberal Education 92 2 42 2006 ] More &quot; engaged &quot; learning models that encompass nutrition is an idea that is picking up steam at all levels of the learning cycle. There is limited research available that directly links a student&apos;s Grade Point Average (G.P.A.) to their overall nutritional health. Additional substantive data is needed to prove that overall intellectual health is closely linked to a person&apos;s diet, rather than a correlation fallacy. [ Mental disorders ] Nutritional supplement treatment may be appropriate for major depression, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, and obsessive compulsive disorder, the four most common mental disorders in developed countries. [ Lakhan SE, Vieira KF Nutritional therapies for mental disorders Nutr J 7 2 2008 18208598 2248201 10.1186/1475-2891-7-2 http://www.nutritionj.com/content/7/1/2 1 ] Supplements that have been studied most for mood elevation and stabilization include eicosapentaenoic acid and docosahexaenoic acid (each of which are an omega-3 fatty acid contained in fish oil, but not in flaxseed oil ), vitamin B 12, folic acid, and inositol. [ Cancer ] Cancer has recently become common in developing countries. According a study by the International Agency for Research on Cancer, &quot; In the developing world, cancers of the liver, stomach and esophagus were more common, often linked to consumption of carcinogenic preserved foods, such as smoked or salted food, and parasitic infections that attack organs. &quot; Lung cancer rates are rising rapidly in poorer nations because of increased use of tobacco. Developed countries &quot; tended to have cancers linked to affluence or a &apos;Western lifestyle&apos; — cancers of the colon, rectum, breast and prostate — that can be caused by obesity, lack of exercise, diet and age. &quot; [ Michael Coren http://www.cnn.com/2005/HEALTH/03/09/cancer.study/index.html Study: Cancer no longer rare in poorer countries CNN 2005-03-10 2007-01-01 ] A comprehensive worldwide report, Food, Nutrition, Physical Activity and the Prevention of Cancer: a Global Perspective, compiled by World Cancer Research Fund and American Institute for Cancer Research, reports that there is significant relation between lifestyle (including food consumption) and cancer prevention. The same report recommends eating mostly foods of plant origin and aiming to meet nutritional needs through diet alone, while limiting consumption of energy-dense food s, red meat, alcoholic drink s and salt and avoiding sugary drink s, processed meat and mouldy cereals (grains) or pulses (legumes). [ Metabolic syndrome ] Several lines of evidence indicate lifestyle-induced hyperinsulinemia and reduced insulin function (i.e. insulin resistance ) as a decisive factor in many disease states. For example, hyperinsulinemia and insulin resistance are strongly linked to chronic inflammation, which in turn is strongly linked to a variety of adverse developments such as arterial microinjuries and clot formation (i.e. heart disease) and exaggerated cell division (i.e. cancer). Hyperinsulinemia and insulin resistance (the so-called metabolic syndrome ) are characterized by a combination of abdominal obesity, elevated blood sugar, elevated blood pressure, elevated blood triglycerides, and reduced HDL cholesterol. The negative impact of hyperinsulinemia on prostaglandin PGE1/PGE2 balance may be significant. The state of obesity clearly contributes to insulin resistance, which in turn can cause type 2 diabetes. Virtually all obese and most type 2 diabetic individuals have marked insulin resistance. Although the association between overweight and insulin resistance is clear, the exact (likely multifarious) causes of insulin resistance remain less clear. Importantly, it has been demonstrated that appropriate exercise, more regular food intake and reducing glycemic load (see below) all can reverse insulin resistance in overweight individuals (and thereby lower blood sugar levels in those who have type 2 diabetes). Obesity can unfavourably alter hormonal and metabolic status via resistance to the hormone leptin, and a vicious cycle may occur in which insulin/leptin resistance and obesity aggravate one another. The vicious cycle is putatively fuelled by continuously high insulin/leptin stimulation and fat storage, as a result of high intake of strongly insulin/leptin stimulating foods and energy. Both insulin and leptin normally function as satiety signals to the hypothalamus in the brain; however, insulin/leptin resistance may reduce this signal and therefore allow continued overfeeding despite large body fat stores. In addition, reduced leptin signalling to the brain may reduce leptin&apos;s normal effect to maintain an appropriately high metabolic rate. There is a debate about how and to what extent different dietary factors — such as intake of processed carbohydrates, total protein, fat, and carbohydrate intake, intake of saturated and trans fatty acids, and low intake of vitamins/minerals —contribute to the development of insulin and leptin resistance. In any case, analogous to the way modern man-made pollution may potentially overwhelm the environment&apos;s ability to maintain homeostasis, the recent explosive introduction of high glycemic index and processed foods into the human diet may potentially overwhelm the body&apos;s ability to maintain homeostasis and health (as evidenced by the metabolic syndrome epidemic). [ Hyponatremia ] Excess water intake, without replenishment of sodium and potassium salts, leads to hyponatremia, which can further lead to water intoxication at more dangerous levels. A well-publicized case occurred in 2007, when Jennifer Strange died while participating in a water-drinking contest. [ http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/magazine/6263029.stm BBC News Why is too much water dangerous? 2008-11-09 2007-01-15 ] More usually, the condition occurs in long-distance endurance events (such as marathon or triathlon competition and training) and causes gradual mental dulling, headache, drowsiness, weakness, and confusion; extreme cases may result in coma, convulsions, and death. The primary damage comes from swelling of the brain, caused by increased osmosis as blood salinity decreases.Effective fluid replacement techniques include Water aid stations during running/cycling races, trainers providing water during team games such as Soccer and devices such as Camel Baks which can provide water for a person without making it too hard to drink the water. [ Processed foods ] [ Food processing ] Since the Industrial Revolution some two hundred years ago, the food processing industry has invented many technologies that both help keep foods fresh longer and alter the fresh state of food as they appear in nature. Cooling is the primary technology used to maintain freshness, whereas many more technologies have been invented to allow foods to last longer without becoming spoiled. These latter technologies include pasteurisation, autoclavation, drying, salting, and separation of various components, and all appear to alter the original nutritional contents of food. Pasteurisation and autoclavation (heating techniques) have no doubt improved the safety of many common foods, preventing epidemics of bacterial infection. But some of the (new) food processing technologies undoubtedly have downfalls as well. Modern separation techniques such as milling, centrifugation, and pressing have enabled concentration of particular components of food, yielding flour, oils, juices and so on, and even separate fatty acids, amino acids, vitamins, and minerals. Inevitably, such large scale concentration changes the nutritional content of food, saving certain nutrients while removing others. Heating techniques may also reduce food&apos;s content of many heat-labile nutrients such as certain vitamins and phytochemicals, and possibly other yet to be discovered substances. [ Morris Audrey Audia Barnett, Olive-Jean Burrows Effect of Processing on Nutrient Content of Foods Cajanus 37 3 160–164 2004 http://www.paho.org/English/CFNI/cfni-caj37No304-art-3.pdf 2006-10-26 PDF ] Because of reduced nutritional value, processed foods are often &apos;enriched&apos; or &apos;fortified&apos; with some of the most critical nutrients (usually certain vitamins) that were lost during processing. Nonetheless, processed foods tend to have an inferior nutritional profile compared to whole, fresh foods, regarding content of both sugar and high GI starches, potassium / sodium, vitamins, fiber, and of intact, unoxidized (essential) fatty acids. In addition,processed foods often contain potentially harmful substances such as oxidized fats and trans fatty acids. A dramatic example of the effect of food processing on a population&apos;s health is the history of epidemics of beri-beri in people subsisting on polished rice. Removing the outer layer of rice by polishing it removes with it the essential vitamin thiamine, causing beri-beri. Another example is the development of scurvy among infants in the late 19th century in the United States. It turned out that the vast majority of sufferers were being fed milk that had been heat-treated (as suggested by Pasteur ) to control bacterial disease. Pasteurisation was effective against bacteria, but it destroyed the vitamin C. As mentioned, lifestyle- and obesity-related diseases are becoming increasingly prevalent all around the world. There is little doubt that the increasingly widespread application of some modern food processing technologies has contributed to this development. The food processing industry is a major part of modern economy, and as such it is influential in political decisions (e.g. nutritional recommendations, agricultural subsidising). In any known profit-driven economy, health considerations are hardly a priority; effective production of cheap foods with a long shelf-life is more the trend. In general, whole, fresh foods have a relatively short shelf-life and are less profitable to produce and sell than are more processed foods. Thus the consumer is left with the choice between more expensive but nutritionally superior whole, fresh foods, and cheap, usually nutritionally inferior processed foods. Because processed foods are often cheaper, more convenient (in both purchasing, storage, and preparation), and more available, the consumption of nutritionally inferior foods has been increasing throughout the world along with many nutrition-related health complications. [ History ] Humans have evolved as omnivorous hunter-gatherer s over the past 250,000 years. The diet of early modern humans varied significantly depending on location and climate. The diet in the tropics tended to be based more heavily on plant foods, while the diet at higher latitudes tended more towards animal products. Analysis of postcranial and cranial remains of humans and animals from the Neolithic, along with detailed bone modification studies have shown that cannibalism was also prevalent among prehistoric humans. [ Villa P, Bouville C, Courtin J, et al. Cannibalism in the Neolithic Science 233 4762 431–7 1986 July 17794567 10.1126/science.233.4762.431 ] Agriculture developed about 10,000 years ago in multiple locations throughout the world, providing grains such as wheat, rice, maize, and potatoes, with staples such as bread, pasta, and tortillas. Farming also provided milk and dairy products, and sharply increased the availability of meats and the diversity of vegetables. The importance of food purity was recognized when bulk storage led to infestation and contamination risks. Cooking developed as an often ritualistic activity, due to efficiency and reliability concerns requiring adherence to strict recipes and procedures, and in response to demands for food purity and consistency. { &apos;&apos;History of the Study of Nutrition in Western Culture&apos;&apos; (Rai University lecture notes for General Nutrition course, 2004) } [ From antiquity to 1900 ] Around 3000 BC the Vedic texts had mentions of scientific research on nutrition. The first recorded nutritional experiment is found in the Bible&apos;s Book of Daniel. Daniel and his friends were captured by the king of Babylon during an invasion of Israel. Selected as court servants, they were to share in the king&apos;s fine foods and wine. But they objected, preferring vegetables ( pulses ) and water in accordance with their Jewish dietary restrictions. The king&apos;s chief steward reluctantly agreed to a trial. Daniel and his friends received their diet for 10 days and were then compared to the king&apos;s men. Appearing healthier, they were allowed to continue with their diet. { Daniel 1:5-16 ( alternative translation ) } Anaxagoras Around 475 BC, Anaxagoras stated that food is absorbed by the human body and therefore contained &quot; homeomerics &quot; (generative components), suggesting the existence of nutrients. Around 400 BC, Hippocrates said, &quot; Let food be your medicine and medicine be your food. &quot; [ 10.1136/bmj.328.7433.0-g http://bmj.bmjjournals.com/cgi/content/full/328/7433/0-g Let food by thy medicine… Richard Smith BMJ 24 January 2004 0–g 328 2008-11-09 7433 ] [ April 2012 H3llBot ] In the 16th century, scientist and artist Leonardo da Vinci compared metabolism to a burning candle. In 1747, Dr. James Lind, a physician in the British navy, performed the first scientific nutrition experiment, discovering that lime juice saved sailors who had been at sea for years from scurvy, a deadly and painful bleeding disorder. The discovery was ignored for forty years, after which British sailors became known as &quot; limeys. &quot; The essential vitamin C within lime juice would not be identified by scientists until the 1930s. Around 1770, Antoine Lavoisier, the &quot; Father of Nutrition and Chemistry &quot; discovered the details of metabolism, demonstrating that the oxidation of food is the source of body heat. In 1790, George Fordyce recognized calcium as necessary for fowl survival. In the early 19th century, the elements carbon, nitrogen, hydrogen and oxygen were recognized as the primary components of food, and methods to measure their proportions were developed. In 1816, François Magendie discovered that dogs fed only carbohydrates and fat lost their body protein and died in a few weeks, but dogs also fed protein survived, identifying protein as an essential dietary component. In 1840, Justus Liebig discovered the chemical makeup of carbohydrates ( sugar s ), fats ( fatty acid s ) and proteins ( amino acid s.) In the 1860s, Claude Bernard discovered that body fat can be synthesized from carbohydrate and protein, showing that the energy in blood glucose can be stored as fat or as glycogen. In the early 1880s, Kanehiro Takaki observed that Japanese sailors (whose diets consisted almost entirely of white rice) developed beriberi (or endemic neuritis, a disease causing heart problems and paralysis) but British sailors and Japanese naval officers did not. Adding various types of vegetables and meats to the diets of Japanese sailors prevented the disease. In 1896, Baumann observed iodine in thyroid glands. In 1897, Christiaan Eijkman worked with natives of Java, who also suffered from beriberi. Eijkman observed that chickens fed the native diet of white rice developed the symptoms of beriberi, but remained healthy when fed unprocessed brown rice with the outer bran intact. Eijkman cured the natives by feeding them brown rice, discovering that food can cure disease. Over two decades later, nutritionists learned that the outer rice bran contains vitamin B 1, also known as thiamine. [ From 1900 to the present ] In the early 20th century, Carl Von Voit and Max Rubner independently measured caloric energy expenditure in different species of animals, applying principles of physics in nutrition. In 1906, Wilcock and Hopkins showed that the amino acid tryptophan was necessary for the survival of rats. He fed them a special mixture of food containing all the nutrients he believed were essential for survival, but the rats died. A second group of rats to which he also fed fed an amount of milk containing vitamins. { Heinemann 2e Biology Activity Manual by Judith Brotherton and Kate Mundie } Gowland Hopkins recognized &quot; accessory food factors &quot; other than calories, protein and minerals, as organic materials essential to health but which the body cannot synthesize. In 1907, Stephen M. Babcock and Edwin B. Hart conducted the single-grain experiment. This experiment runs through 1911. In 1912, Casimir Funk coined the term vitamin, a vital factor in the diet, from the words &quot; vital &quot; and &quot; amine, &quot; because these unknown substances preventing scurvy, beriberi, and pellagra, were thought then to be derived from ammonia. The vitamins were studied in the first half of the 20th century. In 1913, Elmer McCollum discovered the first vitamins, fat soluble vitamin A, and water soluble vitamin B (in 1915; now known to be a complex of several water-soluble vitamins) and names vitamin C as the then-unknown substance preventing scurvy. Lafayette Mendel and Thomas Osborne also perform pioneering work on vitamin A and B. In 1919, Sir Edward Mellanby incorrectly identified rickets as a vitamin A deficiency, because he could cure it in dogs with cod liver oil. { Unraveling the Enigma of Vitamin D - a paper funded by the } { United States National Academy of Sciences } In 1922, McCollum destroyed the vitamin A in cod liver oil but finds it still cures rickets, naming vitamin D. Also in 1922, H.M. Evans and L.S. Bishop discover vitamin E as essential for rat pregnancy, originally calling it &quot; food factor X &quot; until 1925. In 1925, Hart discovered that trace amounts of copper are necessary for iron absorption. In 1927, Adolf Otto Reinhold Windaus synthesized vitamin D, for which he won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1928. In 1928, Albert Szent-Györgyi isolated ascorbic acid, and in 1932 proves that it is vitamin C by preventing scurvy. In 1935 he synthesizes it, and in 1937 he wins a Nobel Prize for his efforts. Szent-Györgyi concurrently elucidates much of the citric acid cycle. In the 1930s, William Cumming Rose identified essential amino acid s, necessary protein components which the body cannot synthesize. In 1935, Underwood and Marston independently discover the necessity of cobalt. In 1936, Eugene Floyd Dubois showed that work and school performance are related to caloric intake. In 1938, Erhard Fernholz discovered the chemical structure of vitamin E. It was synthesised by Paul Karrer. In 1940, rationing in the United Kingdom during and after World War II took place according to nutritional principles drawn up by Elsie Widdowson and others. In 1941, the first Recommended Dietary Allowance s (RDAs) were established by the National Research Council. In 1992, The U.S. Department of Agriculture introduced the Food Guide Pyramid. In 2002, a Natural Justice study showed a relation between nutrition and violent behavior. In 2005, a study found that obesity may be caused by adenovirus in addition to bad nutrition. { &quot; Can a virus make you fat? &quot; at } { BBC News; &quot; Contagious obesity? Identifying the human adenoviruses that may make us fat &quot; at Science Blog } [ See also ] [ Food Health and fitness ] [ Outline of nutrition ] width= &quot; 33% &quot; align= &quot; [ left ] } &quot; valign= &quot; [ top ] } &quot; |Balanced Eating: Food Balance Wheel Biology: Digestion Enzyme Dangers of poor nutrition Avitaminosis is a deficiency of vitamins. Boron deficiency (medicine) Chromium deficiency Iron deficiency (medicine) Iodine deficiency Magnesium deficiency (medicine) Childhood obesity Food : Food (portal) 5 A Day Canada&apos;s Food Guide Fast Food Health food restaurant Food groups Food guide pyramid Food supplements Fruit s Functional food Grain s Junk Food Meat Vegetable s width= &quot; 33% &quot; align= &quot; [ left ] } &quot; valign= &quot; [ top ] } &quot; | Healthy diet : Dieting Eating Healthy eating pyramid Nutritional rating systems Lists: Diets (list) List of food additives List of illnesses related to poor nutrition List of life extension related topics List of publications in nutrition List of unrefined sweeteners List of antioxidants List of phytochemicals Nutrient s : Essential mineral s Essential fatty acid s width= &quot; 50% &quot; align= &quot; [ left ] } &quot; valign= &quot; [ top ] } &quot; | Complete protein Essential amino acid s Incomplete protein Protein combining Protein in nutrition Megavitamin therapy Vitamin C megadosage Profession: Dietitian Nutritionist Food Studies Tools: Nutrition scale Organizations: American Dietetic Association American Society for Nutrition British Dietetic Association Society for Nutrition Education Related topics [ Health ] Auxology Exercise General Fitness Training Life extension Orthomolecular medicine Palatability Physical fitness Diabetes Eating disorders Illnesses related to poor nutrition Malnutrition Obesity Starvation Dietary supplement s Evolution of dietary antioxidants Essential nutrient s Fat Macronutrient s Micronutrient s Nootropic s Nutraceutical s Food fortification Vitamin s [ Further reading ] [ Galdston, I. Human Nutrition Historic and Scientific New York International Universities Press 1960 ] [ Mahan, L.K. and Escott-Stump, S. eds. 2000 Krause&apos;s Food, Nutrition, and Diet Therapy 10th Philadelphia W.B. Saunders Harcourt Brace 0-7216-7904-8 ] [ Thiollet, J.-P. Vitamines &amp; minéraux Paris Anagramme 2001 ] [ 10.1038/scientificamerican0103-64 Walter C. Willett and Meir J. Stampfer Rebuilding the Food Pyramid Scientific American January 2003 12506426 288 1 64–71 ] Curley, S., and Mark (1990). The Natural Guide to Good Health, Lafayette, Louisiana, Supreme Publishing [ References ] [ 2 ] [ External links ] Diet, Nutrition and the prevention of chronic diseases by a Joint WHO / FAO Expert consultation (2003) United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) Frequently asked questions Nutrition Facts and Foods Source of Nutrients, based on USDA National Nutrient Database Release 21, Complete Nutrients Version Nutritional Status Assessment and Analysis - e-learning from FAO UN Standing Committee on Nutrition - In English, French and Portuguese Health-EU Portal Nutrition [ Databases and search engines ] Nutrition Data Recipe Nutrition - extends USDA database with friendly names for common ingredients, recipe nutrition calculator and additional specialized ingredients Category:Applied sciences Category:Food science Category:Health Category:Health sciences Category:Home economics Category:Self care ar:التغذية البشرية cs:Lidská výživa es:Nutrición humana uk:Харчування людини