[ January 2010 ] [ Cheam Broadway - geograph.org.uk - 1079682.jpg Cheam Broadway at the crossroads in Cheam Village England Greater London London Cheam Sutton and Cheam SUTTON SM SM2, SM3 Sutton 020 TQ245625 51.3478 -0.2113 ] Cheam ( [ icon ˈ tʃ iː m ] ) is a large suburban village close to Sutton in the London Borough of Sutton, England, and is located close to the southern boundary between Greater London and Surrey. It is divided into two main areas: North Cheam and Cheam Village. North Cheam includes more retail shops and supermarkets, whilst Cheam Village and the south of Cheam are more residential. The Village does, however, constitute a small retail and restaurant quarter in its own right (see below). Cheam is bordered by Worcester Park (to the north-west), Morden (to the north-east), Sutton (to the east), Ewell (to the west) as well as Banstead and Belmont to the South. Cheam is one of the southernmost areas in Outer London under the control of a Greater London Authority (The London Borough of Sutton) as opposed to Surrey County Council, which controls bordering towns to the South and West including Banstead and Ewell. It is located in London Travelcard Zone 5, and the area is served by Cheam railway station. [ History ] The village lay within the Anglo-Saxon administrative division of Wallington hundred. Cheam&apos;s roots can be dated back as far as 1018, when Chertsey Abbey owned the area. In the Domesday Book, the Bishop was holding Cheam to cater for the monks. Cheam appears in Domesday Book as Ceiham. It was held by Archbishop Lanfranc of Canterbury. Its Domesday assets were: 4 hide s; 1 church, 17 plough s, [ 1 acre m2 on ] of meadow, woodland worth 25 hog s. It rendered £14. { Surrey Domesday Book } In the Middle Ages, Cheam was known for its potteries [ July 2009 ], and recent excavations have been carried out by archaeologists. In 1538, part of Cheam was handed over to Henry VIII. The same year, Henry began work on Nonsuch Palace, which he decorated fantastically. This was later sold and demolished. In 1801, the time of the first census, Cheam had a population of 616. Cheam was the original home of Cheam School which was formed in Whitehall in 1645 and later occupied Tabor Court from 1719 until 1934 when the school moved to Berkshire. Prince Philip attended the school in Cheam in the years immediately preceding its move. [ Cheam Village and North Cheam ] Whitehall in Cheam Village The Mansion House, Nonsuch Park Cheam Village is centred around a crossroad between Sutton, North Cheam, South Cheam and Ewell. As well as bus services, it is served by Cheam mainline station which is in Zone 5 and one stop from Sutton, about a mile away. Services from Cheam to central London include direct trains to Victoria which take about half-an-hour. It has several historic buildings, including some which date back several centuries, such as Whitehall and Lumley Chapel (see below). It is the most upmarket part of Cheam commercially, with its shopping and catering facilities including Waitrose, Majestic Wine Warehouse, Costa Coffee, Prezzo and Pizza Express, as well as many independent establishments. The entrance to Nonsuch Park with its historic mansion (see below) is two hundred yards from the village centre crossroad. North Cheam is situated about a mile north of the village at the crossroad between Cheam Village and Worcester Park, Epsom and Morden. There are well established bus services serving the area, including services 213 (Sutton to Kingston), 151 (Wallington to Worcester Park), 93 (North Cheam to Putney Bridge) and the less frequent X26 express service between Heathrow and Croydon. The nearest tube station is in Morden. Victoria Junction is the centre of North Cheam. The area consists of a large Sainsbury&apos;s supermarket, a neighbouring park, numerous independent shops and restaurants, a post office and several banks. Plans to redevelop a vacant 1960s building at the North Cheam crossroad into a slicker-looking new one will undoubtedly improve the area&apos;s appearance, as well as adding commercial and residential provision. St. Anthony&apos;s Hospital is a large private hospital which exists on the London Road in North Cheam. Cheam Leisure Centre, on Malden Road, offers facilities including a swimming pool (30m x 12m), squash courts and fitness gym. [ Places of interest ] [ Lumley Chapel ] Lumley Chapel [ Lumley Chapel ] Situated next to St Dunstan &apos;s church, it is the oldest standing building in the London Borough of Sutton. It contains many notable monuments to local families and is in the care of a national charity the Churches Conservation Trust. Too small to be used for regular worship it is open to visitors with the key being held by nearby properties. [ Whitehall ] [ Whitehall (Sutton) ] Whitehall is a timber framed and weatherboard ed house in the centre of Cheam Village. It was originally built in about 1500 as a wattle and daub yeoman farmer&apos;s house but has been much extended. The external weatherboarded appearance dates from the 18th century. In the garden there is a medieval well which served an earlier building on the site. The building is open to the public on Wednesday, Thursday &amp; Friday 2-5pm; Saturday 10 am - 5 pm, Sunday &amp; Bank Holiday Monday 2-5 pm. There is an admission charge, and an audio guide. There is a programme of events and changing exhibitions in the house, which also has displays about the history of the house and its inhabitants, nearby Cheam School, and Henry VIII&apos;s Nonsuch Palace. [ Nonsuch Mansion ] A Gothic revival mansion within Nonsuch Park built in 1802-6. The service wing is occasionally open to the public. A popular place for wedding receptions, as it is available for hire. [ The Old Rectory ] A large part timber-framed house, built in Tudor period, but extended and remodelled in the Eighteenth Century. Occasionally open to the public. [ The Old Farmhouse ] A large timber-framed and weatherboarded Yeoman farmers house, forming part of the Cheam Conservation Area with St Dunstan&apos;s Church, Whitehall, The Old Rectory and the Lumley Chapel. The Old Farmhouse has a crown post roof and large Tudor axial chimney stack in the centre with large fireplaces. The earliest part of the house is 15th Century, with several building stages extending the house in the 16th and 17th centuries, creating a Baffle House design popular in the 17th Century. Many original features remain including oak doors and hinges, window shutters and fireplaces. Much of the timber framing is exposed throughout the house. Recent excavation and ground imaging uncovered a large Tudor kitchen underneath the house with a Tudor hearth and hood visible. Access to the cellar kitchen was by a staircase going north to south, which is now under the floor of the current owners kitchen. A file of text and images relating to the house is available in the Conservation Archive in Sutton Library. [ Parks and gardens ] Today Cheam is mainly built up, but still retains Nonsuch Park, also home to an imposing historic building with extensive flower gardens. Facilities include an ice cream shop and car park. Cheam Park backs onto Nonsuch Park, with many facilities such as tennis courts, football pitches and a children&apos;s playground. [ Schools ] There are a number of schools in Cheam, most notably Nonsuch High School, a highly successful grammar school for girls and Cheam High School, a large mixed comprehensive school. There are also a number of primary schools in the area such as Cuddington Croft, St Cecilias Catholic Primary School, Cheam Fields Primary, Cheam Common Primary, Cheam Park Farm Nursery and Infants School, Cheam Park Farm Juniors, Nonsuch Primary and St. Dunstans Church of England Primary. [ Cultural references ] In most series of the comedy show Hancock&apos;s Half Hour, Tony Hancock lived in the fictional road Railway Cuttings, in fictional East Cheam. According to the census of 1841, East Cheam, North Cheam, Garden Green, Cheam Common. So officially East Cheam did exist in name and was not fictional. British stand-up comedian and actor Eddie Izzard mentions Cheam in the &apos;Death Star Canteen&apos; act of his 2000 tour Circle, using it jokingly as the birth place of Darth Vader: &quot;... Sir Lord Vader? Sir Lord Vader of Cheam? &quot; [ Notable people ] Harry Secombe once lived in Cheam David Bellamy attended Cheam Fields Primary School Tim Vine was born in Cheam Jeremy Vine grew up in Cheam Paul Greengrass was born in Cheam Mark Worrall resides in Cheam Alec Stewart (ex-England cricketer) lived in Cheam Peter Manley was born in Cheam Koop Arponen, a winner in the Finnish version of Pop Idol attended Cheam High School Carrie Quinlan lived in Cheam and attended Nonsuch High School Jimmy Mann resides in Cheam, attended Cheam Fields primary school Tony Hancock lived in and set his sketches in Cheam. [ Film locations ] St Dunstan&apos;s Church, used as a film location St. Dunstan&apos;s Church was used in an episode of The I.T. Crowd Series 2. Peep Show used Cheam Park for a location shoot. An episode of Terry and June features the walkway between the library car park and St. Dunstans Church. The Village crossroads was used in a police chase on The Bill. South Drive and the houses within, where used for a soap opera during the mid-90&apos;s. The Old Rectory was used as a location for the rap group N-Dubz in the group&apos;s earlier videos The Bill used the Nonsuch Manor House in Nonsuch Park in one of its episodes. [ Nearby places ] Belmont Ewell Morden Sutton Worcester Park Stoneleigh Epsom [ References ] [ External links ] [ Regional/Europe/United_Kingdom/England/London/Sutton/Cheam ] Hancock&apos;s Legacy David McKie in The Guardian, November 30, 2006. Category:Districts of London Category:Districts of Sutton Category:Districts of London listed in the Domesday Book fr:Cheam nl:Cheam