[ Kid Ory non_vocal_instrumentalist Edouard Ory Edward Ory December 25, 1886 January 23, 1973 (aged 86) La Place, Louisiana trombone and multi-instrumentalist, vocal jazz [traditional]] creole bandleader, composer, promoter 1910-1971 Columbia, Okeh, Exner, Crescent, Good Time Jazz, Verve Louis Armstrong, Jelly Roll Morton, King Oliver, Ma Rainy, Benny Goodman, Charles Mingus ] Edward &quot; Kid &quot; Ory (December 25, 1886 – January 23, 1973) was a jazz trombonist and bandleader. He was born in Woodland Plantation near La Place, Louisiana. [ Biography ] Ory started playing music with home-made instruments in his childhood, and by his teens was leading a well-regarded band in Southeast Louisiana. He kept La Place, Louisiana, as his base of operations due to family obligations until his twenty-first birthday, when he moved his band to New Orleans, Louisiana. He was one of the most influential trombonists of early jazz. Ory was a banjo player during his youth and it is said that his ability to play the banjo helped him develop &quot; tailgate, &quot; a particular style of playing the trombone. In &quot; tailgate &quot; style the trombone plays a rhythmic line underneath the trumpets and cornet s. House on Jackson Avenue, New Orleans, was Ory&apos;s residence in the 1910s. The house on Jackson Ave in the picture is where Buddy Bolden discovered Ory, playing his first New trombone, instead of the old civil war trombone. Unfortunately his sister said he was too young to play with Bolden.He had one of the best-known bands in New Orleans in the 1910s, hiring many of the great jazz musicians of the city, including, cornetists Joe &quot; King &quot; Oliver, Mutt Carey, and Louis Armstrong; and clarinetists Johnny Dodds and Jimmie Noone. In 1919 he moved to Los Angeles —one of a number of New Orleans musicians to do so near that time —and he recorded there in 1921 with a band that included Mutt Carey, clarinetist and pianist Dink Johnson, and string bassist Ed Garland. Garland and Carey were longtime associates who would still be playing with Ory during his 1940s comeback. While in LA Ory and his band recorded two songs, &quot; Ory&apos;s Creole Trombone &quot; and &quot; Society Blues. &quot; They were the first jazz recordings made on the west coast by an African-American jazz band from New Orleans. His band recorded with the recording company Nordskog and Ory paid them for the pressings and then sold them under his own label of &quot; Kid Ory&apos;s Sunshine Orchestra &quot; at a store in LA called Spikes Brothers Music Store. In 1925, Ory moved to Chicago, where he was very active, working and recording with Louis Armstrong, Jelly Roll Morton, Joe &quot; King &quot; Oliver, Johnny Dodds, Bessie Smith, Ma Rainey and many others. He mentored Benny Goodman, and later Charles Mingus. During the Great Depression Ory retired from music and would not play again until 1943. From 1944 to about 1961 he led one of the top New Orleans style bands of the period. In addition to Mutt Carey and Ed Garland, trumpeters Alvin Alcorn and Teddy Buckner; clarinetists Darnell Howard, Jimmie Noone, Albert Nicholas, Barney Bigard, and George Probert; pianists Buster Wilson, Cedric Haywood and Don Ewell; and drummer Minor Hall were among his sidemen during this period. All but Probert, Buckner, and Ewell were originally from New Orleans. The Ory band was an important force in reviving interest in New Orleans jazz, making popular 1941-1942 radio broadcasts —among them a number of slots on the Orson Welles Almanac broadcast and a jazz history series sponsored by Standard Oil —as well as by making recordings. Ory retired from music in 1966 and spent his last years in Hawaii, with the devoted assistance of Trummy Young, dying in Honolulu. [ References ] [ http://www.aaregistry.org/historic_events/view/kid-ory-tailgate-trombonist-composer Kid Ory, &apos;tailgate&apos; trombonist &amp; amp; composer African American Registry 2011-09-28 ] [ Sources ] Marcus, Kenneth. Musical Metropolis: Los Angeles and the Creation of Music Culture 1880-1940 [ External links ] Kid Ory on redhotjazz.com [ Ory, Kid December 25, 1886 January 23, 1973 ] Category:1886 births Category:1973 deaths Category:Dixieland jazz musicians Category:Jazz musicians from New Orleans, Louisiana Category:People from New Orleans, Louisiana Category:People from St. John the Baptist Parish, Louisiana Category:African American musicians Category:American jazz bandleaders Category:American jazz trombonists Category:Jazz trombonists Category:Jazz bandleaders Category:Louisiana Creole people Category:Vocalion Records artists de:Kid Ory es:Kid Ory eo:Kid Ory fr:Kid Ory nl:Kid Ory ja:キッド・オリー nn:Kid Ory oc:Kid Ory nds:Kid Ory pl:Kid Ory pt:Kid Ory fi:Kid Ory sv:Kid Ory