[ José Joaquín ( &quot; Yiye &quot; ) Ávila Yiye Ávila Aniversario.jpg 1925 Camuy, Puerto Rico Evangelical Christian Universidad Interamericana de Puerto Rico Evangelist Carmen Delia Talavera Noemí, Doris Myrna, and Carmen Ilia http://yiyeavila.org/ ] José Joaquín Ávila (born 1925 in Camuy, Puerto Rico ), better known as Yiye Ávila, is an evangelist and Christian writer for Latin America and a former (1953) Mr. North America. { &apos;&apos;1953 Mr North America – AAU.&apos;&apos; Retrieved 8 December 2011. } [ Early life ] Yiye Ávila was born in Camuy, Puerto Rico. His parents (Pablo Ávila and Herminia Portalatin) were respected schoolteachers, and he eventually followed in their footsteps. Surprisingly, though, he enrolled at Universidad Interamericana de Puerto Rico in San Germán, with plans to study medicine. There he graduated with a Bachelors degree in natural sciences and completed his pre-medical studies. In spite of this success, however, he chose to return to his hometown of Camuy and teach chemistry and biology at the local high school, where he taught for the next 23 years. Eventually, however, a change of careers would come about that would take him to over 100 countries. { &apos;&apos;Biografia Yiye Ávila.&apos;&apos; Asociacion Evangelistica Cristo Viene. Camuy, Puerto Rico. Retrieved 8 December 2011. }. [ Sporting life ] He began playing baseball in the Double A level and training as a weight lifter. In 1952, he competed and won the Mr. Puerto Rico bodybuilding contest and would go on to win the title of Mr. North America in 1953. { &apos;&apos;Jose Avila.&apos;&apos; Retrieved 8 December 2011. } While training for the summer Olympic Games of 1956, Ávila experienced terrible pain in parts of his body and, after various tests, was diagnosed with chronic arthritis by his doctors. This prevented him from participating in the Olympics or in any other future sporting event. The pain was so intense, that Ávila suffered limited mobility and could not even perform everyday chores. As a consequence of his health problems, Ávila turned to Christianity and began praying, seeking divine intervention for his situation. According to him, he received a divine revelation through the reading and study of Christian bible and allegedly received healing from Jesus Christ. From that time on, he dedicated himself to ministry. [ Evangelism ] Although Yiye Ávila was always deeply interested in Christianity, he reportedly was convinced to dedicate all his life and work to evangelism after watching a Christian television show hosted by Oral Roberts, an American tele-evangelist in the early 1960s. In 1967, Ávila retired after 21 years as a teacher and began to concentrate on Christian work instead. He became a full-time preacher and, in 1972, he invited several friends, family, and neighbors to form the Escuadron Relampago Cristo Viene ( &quot; Christ Is Coming Lightning Squadron &quot; ), which would congregate constantly in a small room in his house to discuss the Bible, salvation, Christianity, and the Apocalypse. Eventually, his ministry and followers increased dramatically, and a new three story building near the PR # 2 state road was built to accommodate the attending public. His preaching was followed by various church groups and many Latin American evangelists invited him to preach to their local communities and churches. This demand prompted Yiye to create a radio and, eventually, a television network called Cadena Del Milagro (Miracle Network) so that his preaching could reach those same communities that he visited. The network and his ministry has grown considerably over the years, expanding to magazines, books, audio tapes, videos and televised scheduled programming. The three story building which he and his close followers originally built now serves as the headquarters for Yiye&apos;s ministry and his television network. Since the 1970s, Yiye has been a laborious evangelist, visiting almost all Latin American countries, many North American cities, and parts of Europe at one time or another. He appears daily on his morning telecast preaching selected verses from the Bible and receiving prayer petitions from viewers. He also appears every Saturday night on the network&apos;s flagship show, Campaña Por TV (Campaigning Through TV), where he preaches selected verses of the New Testament, presents Christian music groups, and invites viewers to convert to Christianity. In his shows he encourages viewers to constantly congregate by going to Christian churches and to form Christian groups to discuss the Bible and current events. These shows and many other programs are broadcasted in Puerto Rico and the Caribbean, and are transmitted via satellite to Latin America, the continental United States and certain parts of Europe. In addition to his television shows and public preaching, Yiye Ávila is a prolific writer, publishing numerous works throughout his ministry years. Furthermore, many of his public preachings have been recorded and published in tapes and compact discs. [ Personal life ] Yiye Ávila is married to Carmen Delia Talavera (better known as Yeya) and had three daughters: Noemí, Doris Myrna, and Carmen Ilia. Although his ministry has expanded across three continents and he has become a household name among Christian families in Latin America, he still lives a humble life, reportedly living in the same house he owned and in the same conditions before his ministry began. On April 28, 2009, Noemi Ávila, the second daughter of Yiye Ávila, died in a car accident in Freites, Venezuela. [ Literary works ] Title Theme Publisher/Publishing Date Notes The Fast of the Lord: Fast of Victory Fasting; spiritual life Yiye Ávila (January 1, 1976) English, ASIN B0007B0N86 Perfecto Amor: Comentarios Basado en 1ra. Corintios 13 (Perfect Love: Commentary Based on Corinthians 1 Chapter 13) God is love; religious aspects, Christianity Editorial Unilit (August 1998) Spanish, ISBN 0-7899-0070-X Señales De Su Venida (Signs of His Coming) Second advent; eschatology Editorial Unilit Spanish, ISBN 1-56063-433-2 El Engaño (The Deceipt) Truthfulness and falsehood in religion (religious aspects) 1990 Spanish Los Dones del Espiritu (The Gifts of the Spirit) Biography; spiritual Editorial Unilit Spanish, ISBN 1-56063-434-0 El Anticristo (The Antichrist) Antichrist (biblical teaching); the Great Tribulation Editorial Unlimited Spanish, ISBN 1-56063-592-4 ¿Pasará La Iglesia Por La Gran Tribulación? (Will the Church Go through the Great Tribulation?) Tribulation (Christian eschatology) Editorial Unilit Spanish, ISBN 1-56063-743-9 Sin Santidad Nadie Le Vera (Without Holiness No One Shall See Him) Sanctity; spiritual healing Editorial Unilit Spanish, ISBN 1-56063-742-0 La Ciencia De La Oración (The Science of Prayer) Prayer; spirituality Editorial Unilit (December 1995) Spanish, ISBN 1-56063-633-5 ¿Quiénes Se Irán?: El Arrebatamiento De La Iglesia (Who Will Go?: The Rapture of the Church) Rapture Editorial Unilit (December 1995) Spanish, ISBN 1-56063-996-2 Sanidad Divina: Y Por Su Llaga Fuimos Nosotros Curados (Divine Healing: And By His Wounds We Were Healed) Biography; spiritual healing Editorial Unilit (December 1995) Spanish, ISBN 1-56063-634-3 El Cuerpo Glorificado (The Glorified Body) Resurrection; Afterlife (Christianity) Editorial Unilit (August 1998) English and Spanish, ISBN 0-7899-0071-8 Perfecto Amor: Una Exposición Acerca De Cual Y Como Debe Ser El Amor Que Servirá De Puntal God; love; religious aspects; Christianity Editorial Unilit Spanish, ISBN 0-7899-0070-X El Cristo De Los Milagros (The Christ of Miracles) Christianity; spiritual healing Editorial Unilit Spanish, ISBN 0-7899-0073-4 El Profeta Elías: La Fe Y Obediencia De Un Hombre Que Consagró Su Vida Al Servicio De Dios Biblical teachings Editorial Unilit Spanish, ISBN 0-7899-0074-2 El Sacrificio De La Cruz (The Sacrifice of the Cross) Biography; atonement; salvation; the Holy Spirit Editorial Unilit (December 1996) Spanish, ISBN 0-7899-0075-0 El Valle De Los Huesos Secos (The Valley of the Dry Bones) Biblical teachings Editorial Unilit (December 1996) Spanish; ISBN 0-7899-0072-6 Perfecto Amor (Perfect Love) God is love Editorial Unilit (August 1998) Spanish, ISBN 0-7899-0070-X [ References ] [ External links ] La Cadena del Milagro (Miracle Network) official page [ See also ] Bob Graham List of Puerto Ricans [ Ávila, Yiye Puerto Rican evangelist 1929 Camuy, Puerto Rico ] Category:Puerto Rican religious leaders Category:Puerto Rican bodybuilders Category:1929 births Category:Living people Category:Puerto Rican evangelicals es:Yiye Ávila