[ Delfzijl Flag of Delfzijl.svg 120x100px Flag of Delfzijl Delfzijl wapen.svg 120x100px Coat of arms of Delfzijl LocatieDelfzijl.png 250px 53 20 N 6 55 E NL Country Netherlands Province Groningen (2006) 227.48 132.47 95.02 1 January, 2007 Source: CBS, Statline. Municipality 27674 209 CET +1 CEST +2 ] Delfzijl ( [ ˈdɛɫf.sɛi̯ɫ 004 Delfzijl.ogg ], Gronings : Delfsiel) is a municipality and city in the northeast of the Netherlands. It is situated on the left bank of the river Ems estuary, which forms the border with Germany. [ Population centres ] Bierum, Biessum, Borgsweer, Delfzijl, Farmsum, Godlinze, Holwierde, Krewerd, Losdorp, Meedhuizen, Spijk, Termunten, Termunterzijl, Uitwierde, Wagenborgen, Weiwerd, Woldendorp. [ Transportation ] Delfzijl railway station Delfzijl West railway station [ Industry ] Delfzijl is the fifth biggest seaport in the Netherlands and the home of an aluminium plant run by the company Aluminium Delfzijl (part of Tata Steel Europe ). In 2004 the smelter produced a record 112,400 tonne s of liquid aluminium. The foundry produced 157,700 tonnes of raw product. Delfzijl is also known for its chemical industry. On the edge of the town lies an industrial site with an area of 3 square kilometers which is one of the biggest employers in the area. This site is responsible for the second largest quantity of exported chemicals in the Netherlands (after Rotterdam ), and is known for its major exports of chlorine and related products. [ Events ] Every five years the city organises Delfsail, the second-largest sailing event of The Netherlands after SAIL Amsterdam. Annually the &quot; Pinksterfeesten &quot; (Whitsunfestivities) are organised in the city. Delfzijl is seeing a strong resurge in the Dutch economy as the physical centerpoint of Energy Valley. This is the result of a strategic collaboration with the German town of Emden, on the other side of the Eems Estuary. [ International relations ] [ List of twin towns and sister cities in The Netherlands ] [ Twin towns — sister cities ] Delfzijl is twinned with: Aubenas (France) Cesenatico (Italy) Schwarzenbek (Germany) Sierre (Switzerland) Zelzate (Belgium) Shūnan (Japan) [ See also ] Jules Maigret [ External links ] Official Delfzijl website Aluminium Delfzijl Wikitravel on Delfzijl [ 53 20 N 6 55 E region:NL_type:city title ] Category:Cities in the Netherlands Category:Municipalities of Groningen (province) Category:Populated places in Groningen (province) Category:Port cities and towns in the Netherlands Category:Port cities and towns of the North Sea br:Delfzijl ca:Delfzijl de:Delfzijl eo:Delfzijl eu:Delfzijl fr:Delfzijl fy:Delfsyl hy:Դելֆզեյլ id:Delfzijl it:Delfzijl li:Delfzijl ms:Delfzijl nl:Delfzijl nds-nl:Delfziel ja:デルフゼイル no:Delfzijl pl:Delfzijl pt:Delfzijl ro:Delfzijl ru:Делфзейл stq:Delfzijl simple:Delfzijl fi:Delfzijl sv:Delfzijl vi:Delfzijl vo:Delfzijl war:Delfzijl zh:代尔夫宰尔