Gram-positive bacteria, stained purple, of both the bacillus ( &amp; ldquo;rod-shaped &amp; rdquo;) and coccus (spherical) forms.   A few Gram-negative bacteria are also present, stained pink.   Numbered ticks are eleven (11) microns apart. Gram-positive bacteria are those that are stained dark blue or violet by Gram staining. This is in contrast to Gram-negative bacteria, which cannot retain the crystal violet stain, instead taking up the counterstain ( safranin or fuchsine ) and appearing red or pink. Gram-positive organisms are able to retain the crystal violet stain because of the high amount of peptidoglycan in the cell wall. Gram-positive cell walls typically lack the outer membrane found in Gram-negative bacteria. [ Characteristics ] Gram-positive and -negative cell wall structure Structure of Gram-positive cell wall The following characteristics are generally present in a Gram-positive bacterium: [ Madigan M; Martinko J (editors). Brock Biology of Microorganisms 11th Prentice Hall 2005 0-13-144329-1 ] teichoic acids and lipoids are present, forming lipoteichoic acid s, which serve to act as chelating agents, and also for certain types of adherence. { capsule } { polysaccharides (only in some species) } { flagellum (only in some species) } if present, it contains two rings for support as opposed to four in Gram-negative bacteria because Gram-positive bacteria have only one membrane layer. { The individual peptidoglycan molecules are cross-linked by pentaglycine chains by a } { DD-transpeptidase enzyme. In gram-negative bacteria, the transpeptidase creates a covalent bond directly between peptidoglycan molecules, with no intervening bridge. } Both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria may have a membrane called an S-layer. In Gram-negative bacteria, the S-layer is attached directly to the outer membrane. In Gram-positive bacteria, the S-layer is attached to the peptidoglycan layer. Unique to Gram-positive bacteria is the presence of teichoic acid s in the cell wall. Some particular teichoic acids, lipoteichoic acids, have a lipid component and can assist in anchoring peptidoglycan, as the lipid component is embedded in the membrane. [ Classification ] Along with cell shape, Gram staining is a rapid diagnostic tool of use to group species of Bacteria. In traditional and even some areas of contemporary microbiological practice, such staining, alongside growth requirement and antibiotic susceptibility testing, and other macroscopic and physiologic tests, forms the full basis for classification and subdivision of the Bacteria (e.g., see Figure, and pre-1990 versions of Bergey&apos;s Manual ). Species identification hierarchy in clinical settings. As such, historically, the kingdom Monera was divided into four divisions based primarily on Gram staining: Firmicutes (positive in staining), Gracillicutes (negative in staining), Mollicutes (neutral in staining) and Mendocutes (variable in staining). [ Gibbons N. E. Murray R. G. E. Proposals Concerning the Higher Taxa of Bacteria IJSEM 1978 28 1 1–6 10.1099/00207713-28-1-1 ] Since 1987 and the seminal 16S ribosomal RNA phylogenetic studies of Carl Woese (Department of Microbiology, University of Illinois ) and collaborators and colleagues, the monophyly of the Gram-positive bacteria has been challenged, [ 2439888 ] with striking productive implications for the therapeutic and general study of these organisms. Based on molecular studies of 16S sequences, Woese recognised 12 bacterial phyla, two being Gram-positive: high-GC Gram-positives and low-GC Gram-positives (where G and C refer to the guanine and cytosine content in their genomes), which are now referred to by these names, or as Actinobacteria and Firmicutes. The former, the Actinobacteria, are the high GC content Gram-positive bacteria and contains genera such as Corynebacterium, Mycobacterium, Nocardia and Streptomyces. The latter, the Firmicutes are the &quot; low-GC &quot; Gram-positive bacteria, which actually have 45%–60% GC content but lower than that of the Actinobacteria,. [ Madigan M, Martinko J (editors). Brock Biology of Microorganisms 11th Prentice Hall 2005 0-13-144329-1 ] The Firmicutes contain the well-known genera that are majority of Gram-positives of medical interest: Staphylococcus, Streptococcus, Enterococcus (cocci), Bacillus, Clostridium and Listeria (bacilli/rods). This group also been expanded to include the Mycoplasma, or Mollicutes, bacteria-like organisms that lack cell walls and cannot be Gram-stained, but appear to have derived evolutionarily from such forms. Despite the wide acceptance and practical record of utility of the new molecular phylogeny, a small group, including Cavalier-Smith, still treat the Monera as a monophyletic clade and refer to the group as division &quot; Posibacteria &quot;. [ Cavalier-Smith T Rooting the tree of life by transition analyses Biol. Direct 1 19 2006 16834776 1586193 10.1186/1745-6150-1-19 http://www.biology-direct.com/content/1//19 ] It is worth stressing here that the description of bacteria as Gram-positive or Gram-negative is ambiguous as it can refers to three distinct aspects (staining result, cell-envelope organization, taxonomic group), which do not necessarily coalesce for some bacterial species. {, Desvaux M, Hébraud M, Talon R, Henderson IR. 2009. Secretion and subcellular localizations of bacterial proteins: a semantic awareness issue. Trends Microbiol. 17:139-145. doi:10.1016/j.tim.2009.01.004 } When referring to the type of bacterial cell envelope, the terms of monoderm and diderm bacteria are much more appropriate, where the diderm bacteria can even be further differentiated between diderm–LPS and diderm–mycolate, at least. {, Sutcliffe IC. 2010. A phylum level perspective on bacterial cell envelope architecture. Trends Microbiol. 18:464-470. doi:10.1016/j.tim.2010.06.005 } [ Exceptions ] In general, Gram-positive bacteria have a single lipid bilayer (monoderms), whereas Gram-negative have two (diderms). Some taxa lack peptidoglycan (such as the domain Archaea, the class Mollicutes, some members of the Rhickettsiales, and the insect-endosymbionts of the Enterobacteriales) and are Gram-variable. This, however, does not always hold true. The Deinococcus-Thermus bacteria have Gram-positive stains, although they are structurally similar to Gram-negative bacteria with two layers (diderms). The Chloroflexi have a single layer, yet (with some exceptions [ 20495028 ] ) stain negative. [ 10.1111/j.1462-2920.2010.02339.x ] Two related phyla to the Chloroflexi, the TM7 clade and the Ktedonobacteria, are also monoderms. [ 11133473 ] [ 16751552 ] Some Firmicute species are not Gram-positive; these belong to the class Mollicutes (alternatively considered a class of the phylum Tenericutes ), which lack peptidoglycan (Gram-indeterminate), and the class Negativicutes, which includes Selenomonas and which stain Gram-negative. [ 19667386 ] [ Pathogenesis ] Most pathogens in humans are Gram-positive organisms. In the classical sense, six Gram-positive genera are typically pathogenic in humans. Two of these, Streptococcus and Staphylococcus, are cocci (sphere-shaped bacteria). The remaining organisms are bacilli (rod-shaped bacteria) and can be subdivided based on their ability to form spore s. The non-spore formers are Corynebacterium and Listeria (a coccobacillus), whereas Bacillus and Clostridium produce spores. [ Clinical Microbiology made ridiculously simple Gladwin Mark Bill Trattler 2007 MedMaster, Inc Miami, FL 978-0-940780-81-1 4–5 ] The spore-forming bacteria can again be divided based on their respiration : Bacillus is a facultative anaerobe, while Clostridium is an obligate anaerobe. [ See also ] Gram-negative Gram staining [ References ] [ 2 ] [ External links ] 3D structures of proteins associated with plasma membrane of Gram-positive bacteria 3D structures of proteins associated with cell wall of Gram-positive bacteria Gram Staining Procedure and Images Category:Staining Category:Bacteriology ar:بكتيريا إيجابية الغرام br:Gram-Ya ca:Grampositiu cs:Grampozitivní bakterie es:Bacteria Gram positiva eo:Gram-pozitivaj bakterioj fa:باکتری گرم-مثبت fr:Gram positif ga:Gradhearfach id:Gram-positif it:Batteri Gram-positivi mk:Грам-позитивни бактерии ja:グラム陽性菌 no:Gram-positiv bakterie pl:Bakterie Gram-dodatnie pt:Bactéria Gram-positiva ru:Грамположительные бактерии sl:Grampozitivna bakterija fi:Grampositiivinen bakteeri tl:Gram positive th:แบคทีเรียแกรมบวก tr:Gram-pozitif uk:Грам-позитивні бактерії zh:革蘭氏陽性菌