[ April 2010 ] [ 1894 7 25 yes ] { Obljaj, } { Bosnia and Herzegovina, } { Austria-Hungary } [ 1918 4 28 1894 7 25 yes ] { Terezín, } { Bohemia, Austria-Hungary } { Austro-Hungarian (legal) } { Yugoslav (self-declared) } { Serb } { None ( } { Atheist ) } [ Owings W.A. Dolph The Sarajevo Trial 1984 Documentary Publications 0-89712-122-8 86 Premuzic: Do you believe in God, or are you more an atheist? Princip: Atheist. ] Gavrilo Princip ( Serbian Cyrillic : Гаврило Принцип, [ ɡǎʋrilɔ prǐntsip pron ]; [ 25 July 1894 13 July ] 28 April 1918) was the man who assassinated Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria and his wife, Sophie, Duchess of Hohenberg, in Sarajevo on 28 June 1914. [ Introducing Austria: A short history Lonnie Johnson 1989 0-929497-03-1 52–54 ] Princip and his accomplices were arrested and implicated a number of members of the Serbian military, leading Austria-Hungary to issue a démarche to Serbia known as the July Ultimatum. [ First World War Gilbert Martin 1995 HarperCollins 0-00-637666-5 20–24 ] This set off a chain of events that led to World War I. [ Strachan Hew The Oxford Illustrated History of the First World War 1998 Oxford University Press 0-19-820614-3 9 ] Princip was a Yugoslav nationalist associated with the movement Mlada Bosna (Young Bosnia) which predominantly consisted of Serbs, but also Bosniaks and Croats. { Dejan Djokić. Yugoslavism: histories of a failed idea, 1918-1992. London, England, UK: C. Hurst &amp; Co. Ltd, 2003. Pp. 24. } During his trial he stated &quot; I am a Yugoslav nationalist, aiming for the unification of all Yugoslavs, and I do not care what form of state, but it must be free from Austria. &quot; [ Malcolm Noel Bosnia: A Short History New York University Press 1996 153 0-8147-5561-5 ] [ Early life ] Gavrilo Princip was born in Obljaj, a poor part of Bosnia, which was then in the Austria-Hungary empire. His parents, Petar, a postman, and Marija (née Mićić) had nine children, six of whom died in infancy. His impoverished parents could not provide for him and sent him to live with an older brother in Zagreb, now the capital of Croatia. On October 6th 1908, Bosnia-Herzegovina was declared a part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire by Emperor Franz Joseph. This created a stir among Slavic people of southern Europe and the Russian Tsar who opposed the annexation. In February 1912, Princip took part in protest demonstrations against the Sarajevo authorities for which he was expelled from school. Following his expulsion, he moved to Belgrade. There, he sought to gain admission to the First Belgrade Gymnasium but failed the entrance exam. In 1912, Serbia was abuzz with mobilization for the First Balkan War. Princip planned to join the komite, an irregular Serbian guerrilla forces committee of the secret society Unification or Death (Ujedinjenje ili Smrt), known as Black Hand. Princip, however, was rejected by the komite in Belgrade because of his small physical stature. He then went to Prokuplje in Southern Serbia where he sought a personal interview with Tankosić. Tankosić, however, rejected Princip as being &quot; too small and too weak &quot;. Vladimir Dedijer argued that this rejection was &quot; one of the primary personal motives which pushed him to do something exceptionally brave in order to prove to others that he was their equal &quot;. [ Assassination of the Archduke Franz Ferdinand ] [ May 2011 ] [ Assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria ] A map depicting the assassination route. The Latin Bridge Gavrilo Princip (second from right) being arrested by police On 28 June 1914, Gavrilo Princip participated in the assassination in Sarajevo of the Austrian Archduke. General Oskar Potiorek, Governor of the Austrian provinces of Bosnia and Herzegovina had invited Franz Ferdinand and Countess Sophie to the opening of a hospital. The Archduke knew that the visit would be dangerous, knowing his uncle, Emperor Franz Josef, had been the subject of an assassination attempt by the Black Hand in 1911. Just before 10  a.m. on Sunday, the royal couple arrived in Sarajevo by train. In the front car was Fehim Čurčić, the Mayor of Sarajevo and Dr. Gerde, the city&apos;s Commissioner of Police. Franz Ferdinand and Sophie were in the second car with Oskar Potiorek and Lieutenant Colonel Count Franz von Harrach. The car&apos;s top was rolled back in order to allow the crowds a good view of its occupants. The six conspirators lined the route. They were spaced out along the Appel Quay, each one with instructions to try to kill Franz Ferdinand when the royal car reached his position. The first conspirator on the route to see the royal car was Bosniak Muhamed Mehmedbašić. Standing by the Austro-Hungarian Bank, Mehmedbašić lost his nerve and allowed the car to pass without taking action. Mehmedbašić later said that a policeman was standing behind him and feared he would be arrested before he had a chance to throw his bomb. At 10:15  a.m., when the six car procession passed the central police station, nineteen-year-old student Nedeljko Čabrinović hurled a hand grenade at the Archduke&apos;s car. The driver accelerated when he saw the object flying towards him, but the bomb had a 10  second delay and exploded under the wheel of the fourth car. Two of the occupants, Eric von Merizzi and Count Ludwig Joseph von Boos-Waldeck [ June 2011 ] were seriously wounded. About a dozen spectators were also hit by bomb shrapnel. After Čabrinović&apos;s bomb missed the Archduke&apos;s car, five other conspirators, including Princip, lost an opportunity to attack because of the heavy crowds and the high speed of the Archduke&apos;s car. To avoid capture, Čabrinović swallowed cyanide and jumped into the River Miljacka to make sure he died. The cyanide pill was expired and made him sick, but failed to kill him and the River Miljacka was only [ 10 cm in 0 ] deep. A few seconds later he was hauled out and detained by police. Franz Ferdinand later decided to go to the hospital and visit the victims of Čabrinović&apos;s failed bombing attempt. In order to avoid the city centre, General Oskar Potiorek decided that the royal car should travel straight along the Appel Quay to the Sarajevo Hospital. However, Potiorek forgot to inform the driver, Leopold Loyka, about this decision. On the way to the hospital, Loyka took a right turn into Franz Josef Street. Princip was standing near Moritz Schiller&apos;s cafe, having apparently given up, when he spotted Franz Ferdinand&apos;s car as it drove past, having taken the wrong turn. After realizing the mistake, the driver put his foot on the brake, and began to back up. In doing so the engine of the car stalled and the gears locked, giving Princip his opportunity. Princip stepped forward, drew his FN Model 1910 pistol, [ Miller David The History of Browning Firearms: Fortifications Around the World 2006 The Lyons Press 978-1-59228-910-3 128 28 ] pistol-whipped a nearby pedestrian, and at a distance of about 1.5  m (five feet), fired twice into the car. Franz Ferdinand was hit in the neck and Sophie (who instinctively covered Franz&apos;s body with her own after the first shot) in the abdomen, and they both died before 11  a.m. [ Capture and imprisonment ] Gavrilo Princip, seated center of the first row, on trial on 5 December 1914 Princip attempted suicide first with his pistol, then by ingesting cyanide, but he vomited the past-date poison (as did Čabrinović, leading the police to believe the group had been deceived and bought a much weaker poison). The pistol was wrestled from his hand before he had a chance to fire another shot. Princip was too young to receive the death penalty, being twenty-seven days short of his twentieth birthday at the time of the assassination. Instead, he received the maximum sentence of twenty years in prison. He was held in harsh conditions which were worsened by the war. He contracted tuberculosis, and had one of his arms amputated in prison when the disease infected an arm bone. He died on 28 April 1918 at Terezín 3  years and 10  months after he assassinated the Archduke and Duchess. At the time of his death, Princip weighed around [ 40 kg lb ], weakened by malnutrition, blood loss from his amputated arm, and disease. Fearing his bones might become relics, Princip’s Austrian jailers took the body in secret to an unmarked grave, but a Czech soldier assigned to the burial detail made a map, and in 1920 Princip and the other “Heroes of Vidovdan” were disinterred and brought to Sarajevo, where they were buried together beneath a chapel “built to commemorate for eternity our Serb Heroes” at St. Mark’s Cemetery. { http://beacon.salemstate.edu/~cmauriello/pdf_his102/princips.pdf } The cell where Gavrilo Princip was kept The house where Gavrilo Princip lived in Sarajevo was destroyed during World War I. After the war, it became a museum in the Kingdom of Yugoslavia. Yugoslavia was conquered by Germany in 1941 and Sarajevo became part of fascist Croatia. The Croatian Ustaše destroyed the house again. After the establishment of communist Yugoslavia in 1944, the house of Gavrilo Princip became a museum again and there was another museum dedicated to him within the city of Sarajevo. During the Yugoslav Wars of the 1990s, the house of Gavrilo Princip was destroyed a third time by the government; no attempts to rebuild it have yet been announced. The Gavrilo Princip museum has been turned into a museum dedicated to Archduke Ferdinand and the Habsburg monarchy. Prior to the 1990s the site on the pavement on which Princip stood to fire the fatal shots was marked by embossed footprints. These were removed as a consequence of the 1992-1995 war in Bosnia and the perception of Princip as having been a Serb nationalist. Later, a simple wooden memorial was placed near the site of the assassination with the words &quot; May Peace Prevail on Earth &quot; in Bosnian, Serbian and English. There is a plaque in front of the museum at the spot where Gavrilo Princip stood when he fired the shots. Princip&apos;s pistol was confiscated by the authorities, and eventually given, along with the Archduke&apos;s bloody undershirt, to Anton Puntigam, a Jesuit priest who was a close friend of the Archduke and had given the Archduke and his wife the last rites. The pistol and shirt remained in the possession of the Austrian Jesuits until they were offered on long-term loan to the Heeresgeschichtliches Museum in Vienna in 2004. The pistol is now part of the permanent exhibition there. [ Connolly Kate http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/europe/austria/1465206/Found-the-gun-that-shook-the-world.html Found: the gun that shook the world Daily Telegraph 22 June 2004 17 September 2010 ] [ References ] [ Vladimir Dedijer, The Road to Sarajevo, Simon and Schuster, 1966, pp. 187–188. ] [ Further reading ] [ Robert Wolfson John Laver Years of Change, European History 1890-1990 Hodder Murray 3 2001-12-30 117 0-340-77526-2 ] [ External links ] [ 1920 Prinzip, Gabrilo Gavrilo Princip ] Gavrilo Princip article at Schoolnet.co.uk Who&apos;s Who in World War I Gavrilo Princip at firstworldwar.com [ May 2011 ] [ Princip, Gavrilo 25 July 1894 Obljaj, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Austria-Hungary 28 April 1918 Terezín, Bohemia, Austria-Hungary ] Category:1894 births Category:1918 deaths Category:People from Bosansko Grahovo Category:Serbs of Bosnia and Herzegovina Category:Bosnia and Herzegovina atheists Category:Bosnia and Herzegovina people who died in prison custody Category:Causes of World War I Category:Deaths from tuberculosis Category:Nationalist assassins Category:Prisoners who died in Austrian detention Category:Serbian assassins Category:Serbian atheists Category:Serbian people of World War I Category:Serbian people who died in prison custody Category:1914 crimes ar:غافريلو برينسيب an:Gavrilo Princip az:Qavrilo Prinsip bn:গাভ্রিলো প্রিন্সিপ be:Гаўрыла Прынцып be-x-old:Гаўрыла Прынцып bg:Гаврило Принцип bs:Gavrilo Princip ca:Gavrilo Princip cs:Gavrilo Princip cy:Gavrilo Princip da:Gavrilo Princip de:Gavrilo Princip et:Gavrilo Princip es:Gavrilo Princip eo:Gavrilo Princip eu:Gavrilo Princip fo:Gavrilo Princip fr:Gavrilo Princip ga:Gavrilo Princip gd:Gavrilo Princip gl:Gavrilo Princip ko:가브릴로 프린치프 hr:Gavrilo Princip id:Gavrilo Princip is:Gavrilo Princip it:Gavrilo Princip he:גברילו פרינציפ jv:Gavrilo Princip ka:გავრილო პრინციპი ku:Gavrilo Princip la:Gabriel Princip lv:Gavrilo Princips hu:Gavrilo Princip mk:Гаврило Принцип ms:Gavrilo Princip nl:Gavrilo Princip ja:ガヴリロ・プリンツィプ no:Gavrilo Princip nn:Gavrilo Princip pl:Gawriło Princip pt:Gavrilo Princip ro:Gavrilo Princip ru:Принцип, Гаврило scn:Gavrilo Princip simple:Gavrilo Princip sk:Gavrilo Princip sl:Gavrilo Princip sr:Гаврило Принцип sh:Gavrilo Princip fi:Gavrilo Princip sv:Gavrilo Princip tl:Gavrilo Princip ta:காவ்ரீலோ பிரின்சிப் th:กัฟรีโล ปรินซีป tr:Gavrilo Princip uk:Гаврило Принцип war:Gavrilo Princip bat-smg:Gavrils Princips zh:加夫里洛·普林西普