[ Bad Doberan Mecklenburg-Vorpommern Bad Doberan 1362 117,197 2010-12-31 87 DBR 2011 mecklenburg_wp_dbr.png ] Bad Doberan ( [ baːt dobəˈʁaːn ] ) is a former district in Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, Germany. It was named after its largest town, Bad Doberan, the German Bad meaning spa. The district surrounded the City of Rostock, bordering the Baltic Sea in the north as well as the former districts of Nordvorpommern, Güstrow and Nordwestmecklenburg. The district was disbanded at the district reform of September 2011. Its territory has been part of the district of Rostock since. [ History ] Before 500 AD East Germanic tribes dominated the area, who later on emigrated to the west. The then very rural region was thereafter scarcely populated by Slavic peoples until the 12th century. Remains of a Slavic castle can be found in the town of Rerik (which still bears a Slavic name). In 1160 Henry the Lion conquered the region; afterwards German monks, peasants and traders arrived to settle here. In the Middle Ages the region profited from the vicinity of the wealthy Hanseatic city of Rostock. The worst time in regional history was the Thirty Years&apos; War, which depopulated the area almost completely. In 1793 the bathing resort of Heiligendamm (today a borough of Bad Doberan) was established, and the region became a summer residence for the dukes of Mecklenburg-Schwerin. In 1952 the districts of Bad Doberan and Rostock-Land were established. They were merged in 1994 in order to form the enlarged district of Bad Doberan. This district was merged with the district of Güstrow at the district reform of September 2011, forming the new district of Rostock. [ Geography ] The district comprised a 62 km coastline along the Baltic Sea and its hinterland on both banks of the Warnow river. The Warnow enters the district in the south and leaves to the city of Rostock. Rostock was surrounded by the district, but not part of it. [ Coat of arms ] |The coat of arms displays: the griffin from the arms of Rostock, symbolising the city&apos;s influence on the district the bull from the arms of the former duchy of Mecklenburg the clerical staff stands for the old and famous Cistercian monastery of Bad Doberan Coat of arms [ Towns and municipalities ] The subdivisions of the district were (situation August 2011): Bad Doberan Kröpelin Kühlungsborn Neubukow Dummerstorf Graal-Müritz Sanitz Satow Amt-free towns Amt-free municipalities | 1. Bad Doberan-Land [seat: Bad Doberan] Admannshagen-Bargeshagen Bartenshagen-Parkentin Börgerende-Rethwisch Hohenfelde Nienhagen Reddelich Retschow Steffenshagen Wittenbeck 2. Carbäk Broderstorf 1 Klein Kussewitz Mandelshagen Poppendorf Roggentin Steinfeld Thulendorf | 3. Neubukow-Salzhaff [seat: Neubukow] Alt Bukow Am Salzhaff Bastorf Biendorf Carinerland Kirch Mulsow Rerik 2 4. Rostocker Heide Bentwisch Blankenhagen Gelbensande 1 Mönchhagen Rövershagen 5. Schwaan Benitz Bröbberow Kassow Rukieten Schwaan 1, 2 Vorbeck Wiendorf | 6. Tessin Cammin Gnewitz Grammow Nustrow Selpin Stubbendorf Tessin 1, 2 Thelkow Zarnewanz 7. Warnow-West Elmenhorst/Lichtenhagen Kritzmow 1 Lambrechtshagen Papendorf Pölchow Stäbelow Ziesendorf Ämter 1 seat of the Amt; 2 town [ References ] [ External links ] [ Landkreis Bad Doberan ] Official website (German) Regional Tourist Center for Bad Doberan and surrounding Area (D) (English, German, Dutch) [ 54.00 12.00 title dms ] Category:Former districts of Mecklenburg-Vorpommern Category:Rostock (district) da:Landkreis Bad Doberan de:Landkreis Bad Doberan es:Distrito de Bad Doberan eo:Distrikto Bad Doberan fr:Arrondissement de Bad Doberan id:Bad Doberan (distrik) it:Circondario di Bad Doberan nl:Bad Doberan (district) pl:Powiat Bad Doberan pt:Bad Doberan (distrito) ro:Bad Doberan (district) ru:Бад-Доберан (район) fi:Bad Doberan (piirikunta) stq:Loundkring Bad Doberan simple:Bad Doberan Rural District sv:Landkreis Bad Doberan vi:Bad Doberan (huyện) war:Bad Doberan (distrito) zh:巴特多伯兰县