[ 2 ] { GNIS feature ID } { 1495125 } [ 3 ] { North Side, } { Southside, } { East End and } { West End ]. Short Pump is in Richmond&apos;s &quot; Far West End. &quot; } Short Pump is a census-designated place (CDP) in Henrico County, Virginia, United States. The population was 182 at the 2000 census. The village of Short Pump, located at the intersection of Three Chopt Road, Richmond Turnpike and Pouncey Tract Road, was named for the short handled pump beneath the porch of a tavern located there. This area was on the principal route between Richmond and the Blue Ridge Mountains. Thomas Jefferson, Earl Cornwallis, the Marquis De Lafayette, General Peter Muhlenberg, Stonewall Jackson, and Ulric Dahlgren were some of the major people in American history that visited this area. Short Pump has greatly increased population in recent years, due to its proximity to Richmond. It has now become part of Richmond&apos;s Far West End. In 2003, developers opened Short Pump Town Center, a [ 1200000 sqft m2 on ] open air shopping mall. It is located in near many shopping centers, fast-food and upscale restaurants. There is also a skating rink, bowling alley and many neighborhoods under development. There are also nine nearby schools: Short Pump Elementary School, Nuckols Farm Elementary School, Gayton Elementary School, Colonial Trail Elementary School Twin Hickory Elementary School, Holman Middle School, Pocahontas Middle School, Short Pump Middle School, Godwin High School and Deep Run High School. [ Geography ] Short Pump is located at [ 37 39 43 N 77 37 36 W type:city ] (37.661809, -77.626635) [ 1 ]. According to the United States Census Bureau, the CDP has a total area of 2.4  square miles (6.2  km²), of which, 2.4  square  miles (6.1  km²) of it is land and 0.42% is water. [ Demographics ] As of the census [ 2 ] of 2000, there were 182 people, 69 households, and 44 families residing in the CDP. The population density was 76.7 people per square mile (29.6/km²). There were 77 housing units at an average density of 32.5/sq  mi (12.5/km²). The racial makeup of the CDP was 91.76% White, 4.40% from other races, and 3.85% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 8.79% of the population. There were 69 households out of which 31.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 52.2% were married couples living together, 10.1% had a female householder with no husband present, and 36.2% were non-families. 26.1% of all households were made up of individuals and 8.7% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.64 and the average family size was 3.30. In the CDP the population was spread out with 26.9% under the age of 18, 6.0% from 18 to 24, 33.5% from 25 to 44, 18.1% from 45 to 64, and 15.4% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 36 years. For every 100 females there were 106.8 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 107.8 males. The median income for a household in the CDP was $60,531, and the median income for a family was $36,375. Males had a median income of $28,155 versus $26,250 for females. The per capita income for the CDP was $36,804. None of the population or families were below the poverty line. [ Attractions ] There is a lot going on presently in Short Pump and it is under constant construction. Recently constructed West Broad Village contains multiple places to eat, shop and play. The new “village” contains stores such as REI, Home Goods, Whole Foods, Trader Joes, and many more. Some of the restaurants include The Halligan Bar &amp; Grill, Kona Grill, Mimis Café, Jimmy Johns, McCormick and Schmick’s. Down Broad Street from West Broad Village is Bowl America, located off of Pouncey Tract, Regal Cinemas Short Pump, a fourteen theater movie theater and SkateNation Plus. Located in Short Pump Town Center, The Funny Bone Comedy Club features a well-known comedian once a month along with local acts, improv nights, open mic nights, and other special events. Also in Short Pump Town Center are several upscale restaurants and stores including Firebirds, Maggiano’s, Cheese Cake Factory, Nordstrom, Pottery Barn, Crate and Barrel. A new 4-Diamond, Hilton Hotel &amp; Spa opened adjacent to Short Pump Town Center with a full-service spa and Shula&apos;s America&apos;s Steak House. Often, especially after school, large groups of weary students migrate to the Twin Hickory Library in order to cram, cry, or just immerse themselves in naughty shenanigans. Likewise, at Kumon, Asian-American families can bring their children there to hone their math skills in order to be able to prevail over an oppressive Caucasian majority at schools. [ Neighborhoods in Short Pump ] Residents of Short Pump generally believe that the boundaries for Short Pump are Church Road, the Goochland County divide,and the bridge crossing over interstate 64. Short Pump is home to several individual neighborhoods. All of the neighborhoods of Short Pump consist of similar houses which were designed specifically to attract Richmond&apos;s nouveau riche. Several of these neighborhoods are: Grey Oaks- One of the newest, most exclusive neighborhoods in the West End, this affluent community enjoys the privileges of a private pool and tennis courts. Home prices range from $550,000 to well over $1 million. Oak Run - A convenient location out of the way from the hectic traffic of the closer, concentrated area of Short Pump. More than lovely homes with plenty of character off of Church Road. Also, sits next to Barony Woods. Glen Gary - Connected to Waterford, Wellesley, Sherbrooke, and is traditionally well rounded. Hardings Trace- Smaller sized neighborhood with beautiful homes. Great for raising a family. Connects with Burgundy Park and right of North Gayton Road The Colonies - A community with a clubhouse that is walking distance to Wilde Lake and is next to the Tuckahoe Creek. Sherbrooke - Family and kid friendly neighborhood in a convenient location; near the John Rolfe Parkway construction. Wellesley - A large, single family home development built by HHHunt homes. Fox Hall - One of the more affluent neighborhoods of Short Pump; home prices vary from 350,000 to over 1 million. Pine Run-Larger,older homes with beautiful trees. The main road is Fox Meadow Dr. and it runs through the neighborhood. Wonderful atmosphere. Right next to Gayton Elementary. Entrances on Gayton and Ridgfield. Gayton Station - Smaller homes in the meadows of the Tuckahoe Creek. Wythe Trace and Summerwood - Desirable homesites that buffer against the John Rolfe Parkway construction. Barrington - A wealthier community with larger homes along the Church Road Corridor; community lake and dock. Barrington Valley - Located within Barrington, along Three Chopt Road. Barrington West - Barrington&apos;s extension on the western side of Barrington Lake. Sterling - Traditional homes, all brick, on the south side of Church Road. Church Run - A community with open, grassy yards, and connects Three Chopt Road to Church Road. Church Run Parkway is commonly used as a cut through for residents south of Church Road. Waterford - A large neighborhood with countless homesites that are large and comfortable. Graham Meadows - In the meadows of the Tuckahoe Creek. Twin Hickory - A master planned community developed by HHHunt consisting of approximately 1300 homes as of July 2010 located between Nuckols Road and Pouncey Tract Road. Community amenities include pools, tennis courts, parks, and an extensive network of sidewalks and paths. Housing options include apartment rentals, low-maintenance homes, town homes, and large family homes. Adjacent to the Twin Hickory community are the highly rated schools of Twin Hickory Elementary, Colonial Trail Elementary, Short Pump Middle, and Deep Run High School. Also adjacent is Henrico County&apos;s Twin Hickory Library. Nearby amenities include the Short Pump Mall, a wide range of retail shopping along Broad Street, and convenience and grocery retail outlets on Nuckols road. Also adjacent are a retirement community and several office parks. Wyndham - A large neighborhood featuring The Dominion Club and a neighborhood pool. Retrivers Ridge-smaller neighborhood; one and two story homes; nice sized yards; located near Church &amp; Pump Rd Barclay - A quiet, out-of-the-way community with large 1-2 story homes. Shady Grove Estates - A smaller neighborhood with large homes on multiple acres; located off of Pouncey Tracy Rd. Burgundy Parke- A small neighborhood off North Gayton Road, adjacent to the Fox Hall and Colonies neighborhoods Bentley- A master planned community developed by Ryan Homes consisting of 50 beautiful homes with fifteen overlooking Pouncey Tract Road. The community has a wonderful brick and wrought iron fence as its entrance as well as 3 gas lamps. [ References ] Category:Populated places in Henrico County, Virginia Category:Census-designated places in Virginia Category:Geography of Richmond, Virginia ca:Short Pump es:Short Pump (Virginia) nl:Short Pump pt:Short Pump vo:Short Pump