[ London 23 January 1622 Qeshm, Ormus Navigator, explorer English ] William Baffin (died 23 January 1622) was an English navigator and explorer. Nothing is known of his early life, but it is conjectured that he was born in London of humble origin, and gradually raised himself by his diligence and perseverance. (Britannica 11th Edition gives a year of birth as 1584, but this is simply a guess, without any documentary basis.) There is no known portrait of William Baffin. [ Explorations ] William Baffin explored the Arctic circle, the earliest mention of his name occurs in 1612, in connection with Denmark&apos;s King Christian IV&apos;s Expeditions to Greenland under the command of Captain James Hall, whom he accompanied as chief pilot. [ Mills William James Exploring polar frontiers: a historical encyclopedia ABC-CLIO 2003 2 54 ] Captain Hall was killed in a fight with the local inhabitants on the west coast of Greenland, and during the following two years Baffin served in the Spitsbergen whale-fishery, at that time controlled by England&apos;s Muscovy Company. In the first year he served as pilot aboard the flagship of the whaling fleet, the Tiger, while in the second year he served as pilot aboard one of the fleet&apos;s two discovery ships, the Thomasine. In 1615, he entered the service of the Company for the discovery of the Northwest Passage, and accompanied Captain Robert Bylot as pilot of the little ship &apos;&apos;Discovery&apos;&apos;, and now carefully explored the Hudson Strait. The accuracy of Baffin&apos;s tidal and astronomical observations on this voyage was confirmed in a remarkable manner by Sir Edward Parry, when passing over the same ground, two centuries later (1821). The following year, Baffin again sailed as pilot of the Discovery, sailing to the west of Greenland and north up through the Davis Strait, where he discovered the large bay to the north which now bears his name, together with the series of straits which radiate from its head and were named by him Lancaster, Smith and Jones Sound s, in honour of the patrons of his voyages. On this voyage he sailed over [ 300 smi km ] farther north than his predecessor John Davis, and for 236 years his farthest north (at about lat. 77° 45&apos;) remained unsurpassed in that sea. All hopes of discovering a passage to India by this route seemed to be at an end, and eventually Baffin&apos;s discoveries came to be doubted until they were re-discovered by Captain Ross in 1818. &quot; Baffin had long been one of Ross&apos;s heroes, and later he would write of the satisfaction he derived of proving wrong those who, for so long, had doubted Baffin&apos;s accomplishment. &quot; [ Sandler Martin W. Resolute: The Epic Search for the Northwest Passage and John Franklin, and the Discovery of the Queen&apos;s Ghost Ship Sterling Publishing Company, Inc. 2008 27 ] Baffin next took service with the British East India Company, and in 1617-1619 sailed to Surat in British India, and on his return received the special recognition of the Company for valuable surveys of the Red Sea and Persian Gulf which he had made in the course of the voyage. Early in 1620, he again sailed to the East. In the Anglo-Persian attack on the Portuguese fort on Kishm island in the Persian Gulf, a preliminary to the Capture of Ormuz, he died of wounds on 23 January 1632. [ Legacy ] Besides the importance of his geographical discoveries, Baffin is to be remembered for the importance and accuracy of his numerous scientific and magnetic observations, including the determination of longitude at sea by lunar observation or Lunar Distance. Baffin Bay and Baffin Island are named in his honour. The William Baffin rose, developed by Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, was named in his honour. { William Baffin rose } [ See also ] Samuel Purchas [ References ] [ Baffin, William ] [ Markham Clements R. The Voyages of William Baffin, 1612-1622 Adamant Media Corporation 2001 2001 279 1-4021-9532-X ] Biography at the &apos;&apos;Dictionary of Canadian Biography Online&apos;&apos; ( Clements Markham &apos;s edit of journals of five voyages written by Baffin. Facsimile of original published 1881 by Hakluyt Society.) [ External links ] Rob Ossian&apos;s Pirates Cove, &apos;&apos;William Baffin, English Navigator and Explorer&apos;&apos; [ collapsed ] [ Baffin, William London 23 January 1622 Qeshm, Ormus ] Category:1500s births Category:1622 deaths Category:Explorers of Canada Category:Explorers of the Arctic Category:English explorers Category:17th-century explorers Category:Baffin Bay Category:Baffin Island Category:History of the Arctic Category:British polar explorers Category:National Historic Persons of Canada Category:Explorers of Svalbard Category:Year of birth unknown Category:16th-century English people Category:People of the Tudor period ar:وليام بافين be:Уільям Бафін bg:Уилям Бафин ca:William Baffin cs:William Baffin cy:William Baffin da:William Baffin de:William Baffin et:William Baffin es:William Baffin eo:William Baffin eu:William Baffin fa:ویلیام بافن fr:William Baffin gl:William Baffin ko:윌리엄 배핀 os:Баффин, Уильям it:William Baffin lt:William Baffin hu:William Baffin nl:William Baffin ja:ウィリアム・バフィン no:William Baffin nn:William Baffin pl:William Baffin pt:William Baffin ro:William Baffin ru:Баффин, Уильям sr:Вилијам Бафин fi:William Baffin sv:William Baffin tr:William Baffin uk:Вільям Баффін vi:William Baffin zh:威廉·巴芬