[ 三 皇 五 帝 ] { Sānhuáng wǔdì } { San-huang wu-ti } { se waon u ti } The Three Sovereigns and Five Emperors ( [ 三 皇 五 帝 ] { Sānhuáng wǔdì } { San-huang wu-ti } ) were a group of semi- mythological rulers and culture heroes from ancient China during the period circa 2500 BC to 2100 BC. { 劉煒/著. [2002] (2002) Chinese civilization in a new light 中華文明傳真#1 原始社會：東方的曙光. Commercial press publishing company. ISBN 962-07-5314-3. Timetable. } This period preceded the Xia Dynasty. { Morton, W. Scott Morton. Morton, William Scott. Lewis Charlton M. (2005). China: its history and culture. McGraw-Hill. ISBN 0-07-141279-4, ISBN 978-0-07-141279-7, p. 14. } In myth, the three sovereigns were demigods who used their abilities to help create mankind and impart essential skills and knowledge. The five emperors were exemplary sages possessed of great moral character. [ Variations ] Depending on the source, there are many variations of who classifies as the three sovereigns or the five emperors. There are six to seven known variations. { 劉煒/著. (2002) Chinese civilization in a new light. Commercial press publishing. ISBN 962-07-5314-3, p. 142. } Many of the sources listed below were written from much later dynasties. The three sovereigns may therefore refer to Fuxi (伏羲), Nüwa (女媧), Shennong (神農), Suiren (燧人), or even the Yellow Emperor (黄帝). [ Three sovereigns ] The Three Sovereigns, sometimes known as the Three August Ones, were said to be god-kings or demigods who used their magical powers to improve the lives of their people. Because of their lofty virtue, they lived to a great age and ruled over a period of great peace. The Three Sovereigns are ascribed various identities in different Chinese historical texts. The Yellow Emperor is supposedly the ancestor of all Huaxia race of people. { 王恆偉. (2005) (2006) 中國歷史講堂 #1 遠古至春秋. 中華書局. ISBN 962-8885-24-3, p. 13. } The Mausoleum of the Yellow Emperor was established in Shaanxi Province to commemorate the ancestry legend. According to source Three sovereigns  Records of the Grand Historian (史記), addition by Sima Zhen Heavenly Sovereign (天皇), Earthly Sovereign (地皇), Tai Sovereign (泰皇) or Fu Xi (伏羲), Nüwa (女媧), Shennong (神農) Sovereign series (帝王世系) Fu Xi (伏羲), Shennong (神農), Yellow Emperor (黃帝) The book of Lineages (世本) Fu Xi (伏羲), Shennong (神農), Yellow Emperor (黃帝) Baihu Tongyi (白虎通義) (1st variation) Fu Xi (伏羲), Shennong (神農), Zhurong (祝融) (2nd variation) Fu Xi (伏羲), Shennong (神農), Suiren (燧人) Fengsu TongYi (風俗通皇霸) Fu Xi (伏羲), Nüwa (女媧), Shennong (神農) Yiwen Leiju (藝文類聚) Heavenly Sovereign (天皇), Earthly Sovereign (地皇); Human Sovereign (人皇) Tongjian Waiji (通鑑外紀) Fu Xi (伏羲), Shennong (神農), Gong Gong (共工) Chunqiu yundou shu (春秋運斗樞) Chunqiu yuanming bao (春秋元命苞) Fu Xi (伏羲), Nüwa (女媧), Shennong (神農) Shangshu dazhuan (尚書大傳) Fu Xi (伏羲), Shennong (神農), Suiren (燧人) Diwang shiji (帝王世紀) Fu Xi (伏羲), Shennong (神農), Yellow Emperor (黃帝) [ Five emperors ] According to source Five emperors Records of the Grand Historian (史記) Yellow Emperor (黃帝), Zhuanxu (顓頊), Emperor Ku (嚳), Emperor Yao (堯), Shun (舜) Sovereign Series (帝王世紀) Shaohao (少昊), Zhuanxu (顓頊), Emperor Ku (嚳), Emperor Yao (堯), Shun (舜) I Ching (易經) Taihao (太昊), Yan Emperor (炎帝), Yellow Emperor (黃帝), Emperor Yao (堯), Shun (舜) [ Creation myth ] Chinese creation myth s generally include Pangu. It is said that after his death his left eye became the sun, while the right eye became the moon. Different parts of his body became the world. { 王恆偉. (2005) (2006) 中國歷史講堂 #1 遠古至春秋. 中華書局. ISBN 962-8885-24-3. p 4–7. } There is also the legend of the Four shi (四氏) who took part in creating the world. The four members are Youchao -shi (有巢氏), Suiren -shi (燧人氏), Fu Xi -shi (伏羲氏), and Shennong -shi (神農氏). [ Legacy ] These semi-mythical kings are said to have helped introduce the use of fire, taught people how to build houses and invented farming. The Yellow Emperor&apos;s wife is credited with the invention of silk culture. The discovery of medicine, the invention of the calendar and Chinese script are also credited to the kings. After their era, Yu the Great founded the Xia dynasty. [ Gallery ] The Hall of the Three Sovereigns (三皇殿) in Changchun Si, a Taoist temple in Wuhan Shennong tasting herbs to discover their qualities Historian&apos;s depiction of the Yellow Emperor Another depiction of the Yellow Emperor Shaohao Tomb near Qufu, Shandong [ See also ] List of Neolithic cultures of China Emperor of China [ References ] [ External links ] History of China [ Dynasties in Chinese history New creation Xia Dynasty 2852–2205 BCE ] Category:History of Ancient China Category:Chinese mythology Three Category:Legendary rulers bg:Тримата повелители и Петимата императори br:An Tri Enorus hag ar Pemp Impalaer ca:Tres augustos i cinc emperadors de:Urkaiser Chinas et:Kolm monarhi ja viis keisrit es:Tres augustos y cinco emperadores eo:Tri Suverenoj kaj Kvin Imperiestroj fa:سه شهریار و پنج خاقان fr:Les trois Augustes et les cinq Empereurs gl:Os tres Augustos e os cinco Emperadores hi:तीन अधिपति और पाँच सम्राट ko:삼황오제 hr:Tri Uzvišena i Pet Careva id:Tiga Maharaja dan Lima Kaisar it:Tre Augusti e Cinque Imperatori he:שלושת המלכים וחמשת הקיסרים lt:Legendiniai valdovai (Kinija) mk:Тројца Владетели и Пет Цара ms:Tiga Tokoh Mulia dan Lima Maharaja nl:Traditionele Chinese opvatting over de oudste Chinese geschiedenis ja:三皇五帝 no:Sanhuangwudi pl:Trzech Dostojnych i Pięciu Cesarzy pt:Três Augustos e os Cinco Imperadores ro:Trei Auguști și Cinci Suverani ru:Три властителя и пять императоров sk:Obdobie troch vládcov a piatich cisárov sr:Три суверена и пет царева sh:Tri Uzvišena i Pet Careva th:ยุคผู้ปกครองทั้งห้า vi:Tam Hoàng Ngũ Đế zh-classical:五帝 zh-yue:三皇五帝 zh:三皇五帝