Lascelles Abercrombie (also known as the Georgian Laureate, linking him with the &quot; Georgian poets &quot; ) (9 January 1881 – 27 October 1938) was a British poet and literary critic, one of the &quot; Dymock poets &quot;. He was born in Ashton upon Mersey { Chambers Biographical Dictionary, ISBN 0-550-18022-2, page 4 } and educated at Malvern College, { Merriam-Webster&apos;s Encyclopedia of Literature (1995) Merriam-Webster Inc. p.3. ISBN 978-0-87779-042-6 } and at the University of Manchester. Before the First World War, he lived for a time at Dymock in Gloucestershire, part of a community that included Rupert Brooke and Robert Frost. Edward Thomas also visited. In 1922 he was appointed Professor of English at the University of Leeds in preference to J. R. R. Tolkien, with whom he shared, as author of The Epic (1914), a professional interest in heroic poetry. { Humphrey Carpenter, J. R. R. Tolkien: A Biography, 1977, 114. } In 1929 he moved on to the University of London, and in 1935 to a prestigious readership at Oxford University. He wrote a series of works on the nature of poetry, including The Idea of Great Poetry (1925) and Romanticism (1926). Abercrombie repeated in volume after volume the same view of the nature of poetry -- that it is the representation of the poet&apos;s own imaginative experience, conveyed by literary technique to the reader, in whom the same experience is then replicated. The lack of a discussion of such topics in English universities at the time meant that the limitations in this view were not pointed out, and Abercrombie lacked the stimulus of a critical response that would have helped him to amend and develop his theory. His critical studies of Hardy (1912) and Wordsworth (published posthumously) belonged to a much more familiar genre, and were remembered longer. He also published several volumes of original verse, largely metaphysical poems in dramatic form, and a number of verse plays. His poems and plays were collected in &apos;Poems&apos; (1930). In the same year he published separately his most ambitious poem, &apos;The Sale of Saint Thomas&apos; in six &apos;Acts&apos;. A number of fellow poets and professors of literature (including Oliver Elton, Charles Williams and Una Ellis-Fermor ) { See See Oliver Elton, ‘Lascelles Abercrombie 1881-1938’, Proceedings of the Royal Academy 25 (1939), and Charles Williams, Poetry at Present (Oxford, 1930). In a letter of 1944 (cited by C.L. Sastri, Abercrombie’s Poems, Waltair 1971, 170-1) Una Ellis-Fermor described Abercrombie as ‘one of the finest metaphysical and religious poets of the country and this century’. } admired the sublimity of his themes and his ability to clothe metaphysical thought in vivid imagery. Abercrombie is remembered today less for his writings than because of his close friendship with Edward Marsh, Rupert Brooke, and other &apos;Georgian&apos; poets. He was the brother of the architect Patrick Abercrombie. One of his sons was the cell biologist Michael Abercrombie. A grandson, Jeff Cooper, produced an admirable bibliography of his grandfather, with brief but important notes, while a great-grandson of the poet is the author Joe Abercrombie. [ Archive ] A collection of literary and other manuscripts relating to Abercrombie is held by Special Collections in the Brotherton Library at the University of Leeds. { Special Collections Guide } The collection contains drafts of many of Abercrombie&apos;s own publications and literary material; lecture notes, including those of his own lectures and some notes taken from the lectures of others, and a printed order of service for his Memorial Service in 1938. { Leeds University Library Catalogue Record } Special Collections in the Brotherton Library also holds correspondence relating to Lascelles Abercrombie and his family. { Leeds University Library Catalogue Record } Comprising 105 letters, the collection contains letters of condolence to Catherine and Ralph Abercrombie on the death of Lascelles Abercrombie. It also contains Abercrombie family letters, from various correspondents chiefly to Ralph Abercrombie. [ Notes ] [ Bibliography ] Jeffrey Cooper, &apos;A Bibliography and Notes on the Works of Lascelles Abercrombie&apos; (1969). Jeff[rey] Cooper, &apos;Poet, Crusader, Scholar: Lascelles Abercrombie&apos;, Dymock Poets and Friends 9 (2010), 5-18. Richard Price, &apos;The Poetry of Lascelles Abercrombie: A Reassessment&apos;, ibid., 19-27. [ External links ] [ Lascelles_Abercrombie Lascelles Abercrombie ] Encyclopaedia Britannica, Lascelles Abercrombie Elizabeth Whitcomb Houghton Collection, containing letters by Abercrombie Index entry for Lascelles Abercrombie at Poets&apos; Corner Dymock Poets Archive University of Gloucestershire Archives and Special Collections Works of Lascelles Abercrombie in the Special Collections of the Bodleian Library at Oxford University [ Abercrombie, Lascelles Poet, literary critic 9 January 1881 27 October 1938 ] Category:1881 births Category:1938 deaths Category:English poets Category:People educated at Malvern School Category:People from Sale, Greater Manchester ar:لاسيلس أبركرمبي de:Lascelles Abercrombie et:Lascelles Abercrombie es:Lascelles Abercrombie fr:Lascelles Abercrombie it:Lascelles Abercrombie he:לסלס אברקרומבי ja:ラッセル・アバークロンビー simple:Lascelles Abercrombie sv:Lascelles Abercrombie tr:Lascelles Abercrombie