[ yes 1619 08 29 ] { Reims, } { Kingdom of France } [ yes 1683 09 6 1619 08 29 ] { Paris, } { Kingdom of France } Jean-Baptiste Colbert ( [ ʒɑ̃ batist kolbɛʁ ]; 29 August 1619 – 6 September 1683) was a French politician who served as the Minister of Finances of France from 1665 to 1683 under the rule of King Louis XIV. His relentless hard work and thrift made him an esteemed minister. He achieved a reputation for his work of improving the state of French manufacturing and bringing the economy back from the brink of bankruptcy. Historians note that, despite Colbert&apos;s efforts, France actually became increasingly impoverished because of the King&apos;s excessive spending on wars. Colbert worked to create a favourable balance of trade and increase France&apos;s colonial holdings. Colbert&apos;s plan was to build a general academy. Colbert&apos;s market reforms included the foundation of the Manufacture royale de glaces de miroirs in 1665 to supplant the importation of Venetian glass (forbidden in 1672, as soon as French glass manufacturing industry was on sound footing) and to encourage the technical expertise of Flemish cloth manufacturing in France. He also founded royal tapestry works at Gobelins and supported those at Beauvais. Colbert worked to develop the domestic economy by raising tariff s and by encouraging major public works projects. Colbert also worked to ensure that the French East India Company had access to foreign markets, so that they could always obtain coffee, cotton, dyewoods, fur, pepper, and sugar. In addition, Colbert founded the French merchant marine. Colbert issued more than 150 edict s to regulate the guild s. One such law had the intention of improving the quality of cloth. The edict declared that if the authorities found a merchant &apos;s cloth unsatisfactory on three separate occasions, they were to tie him to a post with the cloth attached to him. [ Biography ] Colbert&apos;s father and grandfather operated as merchants in his birthplace of Reims, France. He claimed to have Scottish ancestry. A general (but unconfirmed) belief exists that he spent his early youth at a Jesuit college, working for a Parisian banker; as well as working for the father of Jean Chapelain. Before the age of 20, Colbert had a post in the war office; a position generally attributed to the marriage of an uncle to the sister of Secretary of War Michel le Tellier. Colbert spent some time as an inspector of troops, eventually becoming the personal secretary of Le Tellier. In 1647, through unknown means, Colbert acquired the confiscated goods of an uncle, Pussort. In 1648, he and his wife Marie Charron, received 40,000 crowns from an unknown source; and in 1649 Colbert became the councillor of state (Political minister). [ March 2012 ] [ The death of Mazarin and Colbert&apos;s rise ] { Philippe de Champaigne. } Colbert was recommended to King Louis XIV by Mazarin. While Cardinal Mazarin was in exile, Louis&apos; trust in Colbert grew. In 1652 Colbert was asked to manage the affairs of the Cardinal while he was away. This new responsibility would detach Colbert from his other responsibility as commissaire des guerres. Although Colbert was not a supporter of Mazarin in principle, he would defend the cardinal&apos;s interests with unflagging devotion. Colbert&apos;s earliest recorded attempt at tax reform came in the form of a mémoire to Mazarin, showing that of the taxes paid by the people, not one-half reached the King. The paper also contained an attack upon the Superintendent Fouquet. The postmaster of Paris, a spy of Fouquet&apos;s, read the letter, leading to a dispute which Mazarin attempted to suppress. In 1661, Mazarin died and Colbert &quot; made sure of the King&apos;s favour &quot; by revealing the location of some of Mazarin&apos;s hidden wealth. In January 1664 Colbert became the Superintendent of buildings; in 1665 he became Controller-General of Finances; in 1669, he became Secretary of State of the Navy; he also gained appointments as minister of commerce, of the colonies and of the palace. In short, Colbert acquired power in every department except that of war. A great financial and fiscal reform at once claimed all his energies. Not only the nobility, but many others who had no legal claim to exemption, paid no taxes; the bulk of the burden fell on the wretched country-folk. Supported by the young king Louis XIV, Colbert aimed the first blow at the man accused of being the greatest of the royal embezzlers, the superintendent Nicolas Fouquet. Fouquet&apos;s fall, it should be noted, simultaneously secured Colbert&apos;s own advancement. [ Economic reform ] Colbert &apos;&apos;en grande tenue&apos;&apos; With the abolition of the office of superintendent and of many other offices dependent upon it, the supreme control of the finances became vested in a royal council. The sovereign functioned as its president; but Colbert, though for four years he possessed the title only of intendant, operated as its ruling spirit, having had great personal authority conferred upon him by the king. One must not judge the career on which Colbert now entered without remembering the corruption of the previous financial administration. His ruthlessness in this case, dangerous precedent though it gave, seemed perhaps necessary; the council could not respect individual interests. When he had severely punished guilty officials, he turned his attention to the fraudulent creditors of the government. Colbert had a simple method of operation. He repudiated some of the public loans and cut off from others a percentage, which varied, at first according to his own decision, and afterwards according to that of the council that he established to examine all claims against the state. Much more serious difficulties met his attempts to introduce equality in the pressure of the taxes on the various classes. To diminish the number of the privileged proved impossible, but Colbert firmly resisted false claims for exemption, and lightened the unjust direct taxation by increasing the indirect taxes, from which the privileged could not escape. At the same time he immensely improved the mode of collection on his own. [ Colbertism ] [ Colbertism Protectionism ] Having thus introduced a measure of order and economy into the workings of the government, Colbert now called for the enrichment of the country by commerce. The state, through Colbert&apos;s dirigiste policies, fostered manufacturing enterprises in a wide variety of fields. The authorities established new industries, protected inventors, invited in workmen from foreign countries, and prohibited French workmen from emigrating. To maintain the character of French goods in foreign markets, as well as to afford a guarantee to the home consumer, Colbert had the quality and measure of each article fixed by law, punishing breaches of the regulations by public exposure of the delinquent and by destruction of the goods concerned, and, on the third offense, by the pillory. But whatever advantage resulted from this rule, the disadvantages it entailed more than outweighed them. Colbert prohibited the production of qualities which would have suited many purposes of consumption, and the odious supervision which became necessary involved great waste of time and a stereotyped regularity which resisted all improvements. Other parts of Colbert&apos;s schemes have met with less equivocal condemnation.By his firm maintenance of the corporation system, each industry remained in the hands of certain privileged bourgeois; in this way, too, the system greatly discouraged improvement; while the lower classes found opportunities of advancement closed. With regard to international commerce Colbert suffered equally from lack of foresight: the tariffs he devised protected commerce to an extreme, and under his tutelage enforcement of trade and quality restrictions was draconian. He did, however, wisely consult the interests of internal commerce. Unable to abolish the duties on the passage of goods from province to province, he did what he could to induce the provinces to equalise them. Currency exchange rates still remained between these provinces despite a policy focusing on the unification of French trade. His régime improved roads and canals. Pierre Paul Riquet (1604–1680) planned and constructed the Canal du Midi under Colbert&apos;s patronage. To encourage overseas trade with the Levant, Senegal, Guinea and other places, Colbert granted privileges to companies, but, like the noted French East India Company, all proved unsuccessful. The narrowness and rigidity of the government regulations significantly contributed to this collapse, as well as the failure of the colonies, upon which Colbert had bestowed a great deal of energy and political capital. [ Religion ] { Antoine Coysevox } Even ecclesiastical affairs, though with these he had no official concern, did not altogether escape Colbert&apos;s attention. He took a subordinate part in the struggle between the king and the papacy as to the royal rights over vacant bishopric s; and he seems to have sympathised with the proposal that suggested seizing part of the wealth of the clergy. In his hatred of idleness he ventured to suppress no less than seventeen fêtes, and he had a project for lessening the number of persons devoted to clerical and monastic life, by fixing the age for taking the vows some years later than the then customary time. He showed himself at first unwilling to interfere with heresy, for he realised the commercial value of the Huguenots (French Protestants), who were well represented among the merchant classes; but when the king resolved to make all France Roman Catholic, he followed him and urged his subordinates to do all that they could to promote conversion s. [ Culture ] Colbert in 1682. Colbert took much interest in art and literature. He possessed a remarkably fine private library, which he delighted to fill with valuable manuscripts from every part of Europe and the Near East where France had placed a consul. He employed Pierre de Carcavi and Étienne Baluze as librarians. Colbert&apos;s grandson sold the manuscript collection in 1732 to the Bibliothèque Royale. [ Busby Keith Les Manuscrits de Chrétien de Troyes 1993 Rodopi 978-90-5183-603-5 113–114 ] Colbert has the honour of having founded the Academy of Sciences (now part of the Institut de France ), the Paris Observatory, which he employed Claude Perrault to build and brought Giovanni Domenico Cassini (1625–1712) from Italy to superintend, the Academies of Inscriptions and Medals, of Architecture and of Music, the French Academy at Rome, and Academies at Arles, Soissons, Nîmes and many other towns. He reorganised the Academy of Painting and Sculpture which Mazarin had established. Wishing to increase the prestige of the image of France and the French royal family, Colbert played an active role in bringing the great Italian architect-sculptor, Gian Lorenzo Bernini, to Paris (June–October 1665), in order to design the new East Facade of the Louvre and sculpt a marble portrait bust of Louis XIV. This was quite an international diplomatic-artistic coup because Bernini, who had never left Rome or its vicinity, was personal architect to the pope, whom Louis was attempting to humiliate. However the relations between the two strong-willed men, Colbert and Bernini, proved melodramatically stormy and Colbert ultimately rejected Bernini&apos;s Louvre design, though the Italian artist&apos;s bust of the king (housed today in the Versailles palace) won Louis&apos;s appreciation. { For Colbert and Bernini in Paris in 1665, see Franco Mormando, Bernini: His Life and His Rome (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2011), pp. 245-288. } Colbert himself became a member of the Académie française; and proposed one very characteristic rule with the intention of expediting the great Dictionary, in which he had a great interest: no one could count as present at any meeting unless he arrived before the hour of commencement and remained till the hour for leaving. In 1673 Colbert presided over the first exhibition of the works of living painters; and he enriched the Louvre with hundreds of pictures and statues. He gave many pensions to men of letters, among whom we find Molière, Corneille, Racine, Boileau, P D Huet (1630–1721) and Antoine Varillas (1626–1696); and even foreigners, as Huygens, Carlo Dati the Dellacruscan. Evidence exists to show that by this munificence he hoped to draw out praises of his sovereign and himself; but this motive certainly does not account for all the splendid, if in some cases specious, services that he rendered to literature, science and art. [ Death and legacy ] { Antoine Coysevox and } { Jean-Baptiste Tuby, 1685, in } { Église Saint-Eustache, Paris The tomb, commissioned by Colbert&apos;s widow in 1685, was designed by } { Charles Le Brun, director of official arts in France; Tuby assisted Colbert, providing one of the accompanying figures; the tomb was dismantled at the } { French Revolution and reinstated, in rearranged form, in 1818. } Colbert worked incessantly hard until his final hours. Work was his religion; he once pondered whether it was better to rise early and work or retire very late and work. He concluded that rising early and retiring late would be the ideal combination. But towards the end of his life he suffered from stomach aches, which caused him much distress. He was reduced to eating moist bread dipped in chicken broth for his meals. By 64 he was bedridden and shortly after his birthday he died. The surgeons who examined him found that he had been suffering from kidney stone s. A huge stone was found in his urinary tract, which would explain why he was in such writhing agony. In 1657, he purchased the Barony of Seignelay. Of his children, Jean-Baptiste Colbert, Marquis de Seignelay followed his father as Secretary of State of the Navy while Jacques-Nicolas Colbert was Archbishop of Rouen. His policies inspired those of Alexander Hamilton, the first treasury secretary of the United States. [ Chernow Ron Alexander Hamilton 2004 Penguin Press New York 170 ] A steam corvette in 1848 A battleship in 1875 A cargo ship in 1914 A dundee in 1916 A French heavy cruiser, launched 1928 A French missile cruiser, launched 1956 [ Quotes ] [ February 2009 ] [ April 2010 ] &quot; It is simply, and solely, the abundance of money within a state [which] makes the difference in its grandeur and power. &quot; (MH - p.  53) &quot; The art of taxation consists in so plucking the goose as to obtain the largest amount of feathers with the least possible amount of hissing &quot; [ See also ] [ Kingdom of France ] Hans Carl von Carlowitz [ Sources ] Ames, Glenn J. Colbert, Mercantilism, and the French Quest for Asian Trade (1996) Clément, Jean-Pierre. Vie de Colbert, (Paris, 1846) Etext Lettres, instructions, et Memoires de Colbert, (nine volumes, Paris, 1861–82) Histoire de Colbert et son administration, edited by Mademoiselle Clément, (Paris, 1874) Gordault, Colbert, ministre de Louis XIV, (Tours, 1885) Lavisse, Histoire de France, volume vii, part i, (Tours, 1905) Sargent, Economic Policy of Colbert, (London, 1899), which contains a bibliography of works relating to Colbert and his time. [ References ] Soll, Jacob The Information Master: Jean-Baptiste Colbert&apos;s Secret State Intelligence System; (University of Michigan Press 2009). http://www.tnr.com/article/books-and-arts/the-colbert-report?page=0,0 [ External links ] [ Jean-Baptiste Colbert ] &apos;&apos;Histoire de la vie et de l&apos;administration de Colbert&apos;&apos; by Jean-Pierre Clément [ Seat 24 Académie française 1667–1683 Jean de Silhon Jean de la Fontaine ] [ Colbert, Jean-Baptiste 29 August 1619 Reims, France 6 September 1683 Paris, Kingdom of France ] Category:1619 births Category:1683 deaths Category:People from Reims Category:Government ministers of France Category:French economists Category:Members of the Académie française Category:Burials at Église Saint-Eustache, Paris Category:Heads of the Bâtiments du Roi Category:Mercantilists ar:كولبير be:Жан-Батыст Кальбер bg:Жан-Батист Колбер br:Jean-Baptiste Colbert ca:Jean-Baptiste Colbert cs:Jean-Baptiste Colbert da:Jean-Baptiste Colbert de:Jean-Baptiste Colbert et:Jean-Baptiste Colbert el:Ζαν Μπατίστ Κολμπέρ es:Jean-Baptiste Colbert eo:Jean-Baptiste Colbert eu:Jean-Baptiste Colbert fa:ژان بتیست کلبر fr:Jean-Baptiste Colbert ko:장바티스트 콜베르 is:Jean-Baptiste Colbert it:Jean-Baptiste Colbert he:ז&apos;אן-בטיסט קולבר la:Ioannes Baptista Colbert lv:Žans Batists Kolbērs lb:Jean-Baptiste Colbert hu:Jean-Baptiste Colbert nl:Jean-Baptiste Colbert ja:ジャン＝バティスト・コルベール no:Jean-Baptiste Colbert oc:Jean-Baptiste Colbert pl:Jean-Baptiste Colbert pt:Jean-Baptiste Colbert ro:Jean-Baptiste Colbert ru:Кольбер, Жан-Батист sk:Jean-Baptiste Colbert sl:Jean-Baptiste Colbert fi:Jean-Baptiste Colbert sv:Jean-Baptiste Colbert th:ฌ็อง-บาติสต์ กอลแบร์ uk:Жан-Батист Кольбер vi:Jean-Baptiste Colbert zh:让-巴普蒂斯特·柯尔贝尔