National Center for Biotechnology Information logo The National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) is part of the United States National Library of Medicine (NLM), a branch of the National Institutes of Health. The NCBI is located in Bethesda, Maryland ( [ 38.994994 -77.099339 inline,title region:US_type:landmark ] ) and was founded in 1988 through legislation sponsored by Senator Claude Pepper. The NCBI houses genome sequencing data in GenBank and an index of biomedical research articles in PubMed Central and PubMed, as well as other information relevant to biotechnology. All these databases are available online through the Entrez search engine. NCBI is directed by David Lipman, one of the original authors of the BLAST sequence alignment program and a widely respected figure in Bioinformatics. He also leads an intramural research program, including groups led by Stephen Altschul (another BLAST co-author), David Landsman, and Eugene Koonin (a prolific author on comparative genomics ). [ GenBank ] [ GenBank ] The NCBI has had responsibility for making available the GenBank DNA sequence database since 1992. { The NCBI Handbook, History } GenBank coordinates with individual laboratories and other sequence databases such as those of the European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL) and the DNA Data Bank of Japan (DDBJ). { The NCBI Handbook, International Collaborations } Since 1992, NCBI has grown to provide other databases in addition to GenBank. NCBI provides Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man, the Molecular Modeling Database (3D protein structures), dbSNP a database of single-nucleotide polymorphism s, the Unique Human Gene Sequence Collection, a Gene Map of the human genome, a Taxonomy Browser, and coordinates with the National Cancer Institute to provide the Cancer Genome Anatomy Project. The NCBI assigns a unique identifier (Taxonomy ID number) to each species of organism. The NCBI has software tools that are available by WWW browsing or by FTP. For example, BLAST is a sequence similarity searching program. BLAST can do sequence comparisons against the GenBank DNA database in less than 15 seconds. [ NCBI Bookshelf ] The NCBI Bookshelf is a collection of freely available, downloadable, on-line versions of selected biomedical books. As of April 2011, the Bookshelf had 845 titles covering a wide range of topics including molecular biology, biochemistry, cell biology, genetics, microbiology, disease states from a molecular and cellular point of view, research methods, and virology. Some of the books are online versions of previously published books, while others, such as Coffee Break (book), are written and edited by NCBI staff. The Bookshelf is a complement to the Entrez PubMed repository of peer-reviewed publication abstracts in that Bookshelf contents provide established perspectives on evolving areas of study and a context in which many disparate individual pieces of reported research can be organized. [ See also ] European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI) DNA Data Bank of Japan (DDBJ) [ References ] [ External links ] NCBI Home page National Library of Medicine National Institutes of Health Category:Discipline-oriented digital libraries Category:Medical research institutes kbd:Лъэпкъэгъу центр биотехнологиэ информациэкӀэ ar:المركز الوطني لمعلومات التكنولوجيا الحيوية be:Нацыянальны цэнтр біятэхналагічнай інфармацыі ЗША be-x-old:Нацыянальны цэнтар біятэхналягічнай інфармацыі ЗША ca:National Center for Biotechnology Information cs:National Center for Biotechnology Information de:National Center for Biotechnology Information es:Centro Nacional para la Información Biotecnológica eo:National Center for Biotechnology Information fa:مرکز ملی اطلاعات زیست‌فناوری fr:National Center for Biotechnology Information ko:미국 국립생물공학정보센터 hy:ԱՄՆ-ի կենսատեխնոլոգիական ինֆորմացիայի ազգային կենտրոն it:National Center for Biotechnology Information he:NCBI nl:National Center for Biotechnology Information ja:国立生物工学情報センター pl:National Center for Biotechnology Information pt:National Center for Biotechnology Information ru:Национальный центр биотехнологической информации sr:Nacionalni centar za biotehnološke informacije sv:National Center for Biotechnology Information tr:National Center for Biotechnology Information uk:Національний центр біотехнологічної інформації zh:美国国家生物技术信息中心