[ Lüchow-Dannenberg Lower Saxony Lüchow 1220 03354 51,352 2005 42 DAN Lower Saxony_DAN.svg ] Lüchow-Dannenberg is a district in Lower Saxony, Germany which is usually referred to as Hannoversches Wendland or Wendland. It is bounded by (from the west and clockwise) the districts of Uelzen and Lüneburg and the states of Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania (district of Ludwigslust-Parchim ), Brandenburg (district of Prignitz ) and Saxony-Anhalt (districts of Stendal and Altmarkkreis Salzwedel ). [ History ] In medieval times the counties of Lüchow and Dannenberg occupied the area (from the early 12th century on). These counties were originally Slavic states that lost their independence to the Duchy of Brunswick-Lüneburg in the beginning of the 14th century. The area was ruled by Lüneburg until 1705 and became then a part of the Electorate of Hanover. When the Kingdom of Hanover was annexed by Prussia (1866), the districts of Lüchow and Dannenberg were established within the new Province of Hanover. In 1932 the two districts of Lüchow and Dannenberg were merged into the current district with Dannenberg as capital. In 1951 the seat of the administration was moved to Lüchow. [ Current issues ] Since the end of the 1990s the financial problems of the municipalities in the district grew more and more severe. To save money spent for administration a major municipal reform is currently discussed. The two most likely outcomes of the reform will be either a conversion of the district to an urban district, in which the 27 municipalities will then become boroughs of one town. The other discussed solution is the merger into two Samtgemeinde n. The dissolution of the district and inclusion of the two remaining Samtgemeinden into the districts of Lüneburg and Uelzen are also discussed. [ Geography ] The district is named for the two main towns. It is better known as the Wendland, a designation referring to the Slavic people of the Wends from Obotrite tribe Drevani, who lived there till the 18th century — the last known user of the local dialect of Polabian language died in 1752. The landscape is characterised by riverside woodlands along the Elbe river and a hilly countryside. In addition, the Wendland is known for the small village of Gorleben (part of the Samtgemeinde Gartow ), where the establishment of a final disposal place for radioactive waste is planned. The salt dome Gorleben, a deep geological repository is proposed. Moreover, an interim storage for spent nuclear fuel is located in Gorleben. The area has been a site of clashes between the police and anti-nuclear protesters since the 1980s. [ Coat of arms ] Coat of arms The coat of arms displays: a fir, which was the heraldic symbol of the counts of Dannenberg three yellow rhombs from the arms of the counts of Lüchow [ Towns and municipalities ] 1. Elbtalaue Damnatz Dannenberg 1, 2 Göhrde Gusborn Hitzacker 2 Jameln Karwitz Langendorf Neu Darchau Zernien 2. Gartow Gartow 1 Gorleben Höhbeck Prezelle Schnackenburg 2 3. Lüchow Bergen an der Dumme Clenze Küsten Lemgow Luckau (Wendland) Lübbow Lüchow 1, 2 Schnega Trebel Waddeweitz Woltersdorf Wustrow 2 Samtgemeinden (collective municipalities) &apos; with member municipalities 1 seat of the Samtgemeinde; 2 town [ People ] See People from Lüchow-Dannenberg. [ References ] [ External links ] [ Landkreis Lüchow-Dannenberg ] Official website (German) [ 53.0 11.17 title dms ] Category:Districts of Lower Saxony Category:Obotrites da:Landkreis Lüchow-Dannenberg de:Landkreis Lüchow-Dannenberg es:Distrito de Lüchow-Dannenberg eo:Distrikto Lüchow-Dannenberg fr:Arrondissement de Lüchow-Dannenberg id:Lüchow-Dannenberg (distrik) it:Circondario di Lüchow-Dannenberg nl:Lüchow-Dannenberg pnb:لخو-ڈاننبرگ pl:Powiat Lüchow-Dannenberg pt:Lüchow-Dannenberg ro:Lüchow-Dannenberg (district) ru:Люхов-Данненберг (район) stq:Loundkring Lüchow-Dannenberg sr:Округ Лихов-Даненберг sv:Landkreis Lüchow-Dannenberg war:Lüchow-Dannenberg zh:吕肖-丹嫩贝格县