[ Brie 225px France Seine-et-Marne By law in the US and Australia, not in most of Europe Soft-ripened generally one week or more AOC, 1980, for both Brie de Meaux and Brie de Melun ] [ other uses Brie (disambiguation) ] Brie [ ˈ b r iː ] is a soft cow&apos;s cheese named after Brie, the French region from which it originated (roughly corresponding to the modern département of Seine-et-Marne ). It is pale in color with a slight grayish tinge under a rind of white mold. The whitish moldy rind is typically eaten, the flavor quality of which depends largely upon the ingredients used and its manufacturing environment. [ Production ] &apos;&apos;Brie noir&apos;&apos; Brie may be produced from whole or semi-skimmed milk. The curd is obtained by adding rennet to raw milk and heating it to a maximum temperature of 37° C. The cheese is then cast into molds, sometimes with a traditional perforated ladle called a pelle à brie. The 20cm mold is filled with several thin layers of cheese and drained for approximately 18 hours. The cheese is then taken out of the molds, salted, inoculated with cheese mold ( Penicillium candidum, Penicillium camemberti ) or Brevibacterium linens, and aged in a cellar for at least four to five weeks. If left to mature for longer, typically several months to a year, the cheese becomes stronger in flavor and taste, the pâte drier and darker, and the rind also darker and crumbly, and is called Brie Noir (Fr: black Brie). Around the Île-de-France where Brie is made, people enjoy soaking this in café au lait and eating it for breakfast. [ Masui T. Tomoko, Y., Hodgson, R., Robuchon, J. French Cheeses DK 2004 1-4053-0666-1 ] Overripe Brie contains an unpleasant excessive amount of ammonia which is produced by the same microorganism s required for ripening. { McGee, Harold, &quot; On Food and Cooking: The Science and Lore of the Kitchen. &quot; Simon &amp; Schuster, 2004. } &apos;&apos;Brie de Melun&apos;&apos; [ Nutrition ] A one ounce serving of Brie contains 94.9 calories and 7.9 grams of fat. Over half of the fat in brie is saturated fat. There are 4.9 grams of saturated fat per ounce of cheese. Brie is a good source of protein; a single ounce of Brie can provide 5 to 6 grams of protein. Brie contains a good amount of both Vitamin B12 and Vitamin B2. It takes at least sixty days for Brie to pasteurize and go from raw milk Brie to pasteurized Brie. [ Varieties ] There are now many varieties of Brie made all over the world, including plain Brie, herbed varieties, double and triple Brie and versions of Brie made with other types of milk. Indeed, although Brie is a French cheese, it is possible to obtain Somerset and Wisconsin Brie. Despite the variety of Bries, the French government officially certifies only two types of cheese to be sold under that name: Brie de Meaux and Brie de Melun. Brie de Meaux, manufactured outside of Paris since the 8th century, was originally known as the &quot; King&apos;s Cheese &quot;, or, after the French Revolution, the &quot; King of Cheeses, &quot; and was enjoyed by the peasantry and nobility alike. It was granted the protection of Appellation d&apos;origine contrôlée (AOC) status in 1980, and it is produced primarily in the eastern part of the Parisian basin. [ Serving ] Brie is usually purchased either in a full wheel or as a wheel segment. [ Androuët P. Le brie Presses du Village 1997 978-88-15-06225-3 ] Further sub-division in most homes is subject to social conventions that have arisen to ensure that each person partaking in the cheese receives a roughly equal amount of skin. Slices are taken along the radius of the cheese rather than across the point. Removing the more desirable tip from a wedge of brie is known as &quot; pointing the Brie &quot; and is regarded as a faux pas. The white outside of the cheese is completely edible, and many eat Brie whole. [ Benêt J. Histoire du fromage de Langres Broché 2005 978-2-87825-332-0 ] [ Comparison to Camembert ] Camembert is a similar soft cheese, also made from cow milk. However, there are differences beyond the simple geographical fact that Brie originates from the Champagne and Camembert from Normandy. Brie is produced in large wheels and thus ripens differently: when sold it typically has been cut from a wheel, and therefore its side is not covered by the rind; Camembert, meanwhile, is ripened as a small round cheese and sold as such, so it is fully covered by rind. This changes the ratio between the rind and the inner part of the cheese. Furthermore, Brie contains more fat than Camembert. [ Please reference nutritional information or some similar source demonstrating the fat difference. August 2011 ] [ References ] [ October 2008 ] [ External links ] Livestrong Brie Article EBEX 91.5 Nutrition and healthy eating Category:French cheeses Category:French products with protected designation of origin Category:Cow&apos;s-milk cheeses bg:Бри (сирене) ca:Brie (formatge) cv:Бри (чăкăт) cs:Brie cy:Brie da:Brie de:Brie (Käse) et:Brie juust el:Μπρι (τυρί) es:Brie (queso) eo:Brio (fromaĝo) eu:Brie (gazta) fr:Brie (fromage) gl:Brie (queixo) hr:Brie (sir) id:Brie it:Brie (formaggio) he:ברי la:Bria (caseus) hu:Brie nl:Brie (kaas) ja:ブリーチーズ no:Brie pl:Brie (ser) pt:Brie (queijo) ru:Бри (сыр) scn:Brie (furmaggiu) simple:Brie sk:Brie (syr) sl:Brie fi:Brie (juusto) sv:Brie tr:Brie uk:Брі (сир) zh:布利乾酪