[ November 2011 ] { Kharkov } An intersection is a road junction where two or more roads either meet or cross at grade (they are at the same level). An intersection may be 3-way - a T junction or fork, 4-way - a crossroads, or 5-way or more. It may often be controlled by traffic lights, and may be a roundabout ( traffic circle in America). This article primarily reflects jurisdictions where vehicles are driven on the right. If not otherwise specified, &quot; right &quot; and &quot; left &quot; can be reversed to reflect jurisdictions where vehicles are driven on the left. [ Types of intersections ] Some may classify intersections as 3-way, 4-way, 5-way, 6-way, etc. depending on the number of road segments (arms) that come together at the intersection. [ September 2011 ] 3-way intersection - A junction between three road segments (arms) is a T junction (two arms form one road) or a Y-junction. 4-way intersections are the most common, because they usually involve a crossing over of two streets or roads. In areas where there are blocks and in some other cases, the crossing streets or roads are perpendicular to each other. However, two roads may cross at a different angle. In a few cases, the junction of two road segments may be offset from each when reaching an intersection, even though both ends may be considered the same street. 5-way intersections are less common but still exist, especially in urban areas with non-rectangular blocks. 6-way intersections usually involve a crossing of three streets at one junction; for example, a crossing of two perpendicular streets and a diagonal street is a rather common type of 6-way intersection. Seven or more approaches to a single intersection, such as at Seven Dials, London, are rare. { Veterans Memorial Parkway, an at-grade } { limited-access road in } { London, Ontario. } Another way of classifying intersections is by traffic control: Uncontrolled intersection s, without signs or signals (or sometimes with a warning sign). Priority rules may vary by country: on a 4-way intersection traffic from the right often has priority; on a 3-way intersection either traffic from the right has priority again, or traffic on the continuing road. For traffic coming from the same or opposite direction, that which goes straight has priority over that which turns off. Yield-controlled intersections may or may not have specific &quot; YIELD &quot; signs (known as &quot; GIVE WAY &quot; signs in some countries). Stop-controlled intersections have one or more &quot; STOP &quot; signs. Two-way stops are common, while some countries also employ four-way stops. Signal-controlled intersections depend on traffic signal s, usually electric, which indicate which traffic is allowed to proceed at any particular time. A traffic circle is a type of intersection at which traffic streams are directed around a circle. Types of traffic circles include roundabouts, &apos;mini-roundabouts&apos;, &apos;rotaries&apos;, &quot; STOP &quot; -controlled circles, and signal-controlled circles. Some people consider roundabouts to be a distinct type of intersection from traffic circles (with the distinction based on certain differences in size and engineering). A box junction can be added to an intersection, generally prohibiting entry to the intersection unless the exit is clear. Some intersections employ indirect left turns to increase capacity and reduce delays. The Michigan left combines a right turn and a U-turn. Jughandle lefts diverge to the right, then curve to the left, converting a left turn to a crossing maneuver. These techniques are generally used in conjunction with signal-controlled intersections, although they may also be used at stop-controlled intersections. [ Turns ] At same-grade intersections, turns are usually allowed, but often regulated to avoid interference or collision with other traffic. If the crossing street is a one-way street, or other cases of flow limitation, certain turns may be not allowed or limited by regulatory signs or signals. In the absence of lane markings indicating otherwise, left turns should be made from the leftmost lane and right turns from the rightmost lane to avoid collision or blocking of traffic going straight. [ July 2011 us? ] [ Turn lanes ] At intersections with large proportions of turning traffic, turn lanes (also known as turn bays) [ http://mutcd.fhwa.dot.gov/pdfs/2009/part1.pdf &apos;&apos;Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices&apos;&apos; (MUTCD), Part 1 U.S. DOT, Federal Highway Administration PDF December 11, 2009 November 28, 2011 ] may be provided where the street/road approaches the intersection. For example in the intersection shown in the following diagram, there are left turn lanes in the east-west street for traffic approaching the intersection in the eastbound and westbound directions. Turn lanes may be provided to allow vehicles to turn across oncoming traffic (i.e., a left turn in right-side driving countries, or a right turn in left-side driving countries), or to turn off the road without crossing traffic (i.e., a right turn in right-side driving countries, or a left turn in left-side driving countries). Absence of a turn lane does not normally indicate a prohibition of turns in that direction. Instead, traffic control signs are used to prohibit turns. Turn lanes may be provided to increase the capacity of an intersection, or to improve safety. Turn lanes can have a dramatic effect on the safety of a junction. In rural areas, crash frequency can be reduced by up to 48% if left turn lanes are provided on both main-road approaches at stop-controlled intersections. At signalized intersections, crashes can be reduced by 33%. Results will be slightly lower in urban areas. { D.W. Harwood,et al., Safety Effectiveness of Intersection Left- and Right-Turn Lanes, Federal Highway Administration Office of Safety Research and Development, 2002, } Turn lanes are marked with an arrow bending into the direction of the turn which is to be made from that lane. Multi-headed arrows indicate that vehicle drivers may travel in any one of directions shown. Traffic signals facing vehicles in turn lanes often have arrow-shaped indications. Green arrows indicate protected turn phases, when vehicles may turn unhindered by oncoming traffic. Red arrows may be displayed to prohibit turns in that direction. Red arrows may be displayed along with a circular green indication to show that turns in the direction of the arrow are prohibited, but other movements are allowed. In some jurisdictions, a red arrow prohibits a turn on red. { New York State Driver&apos;s Manual, Chapter 4. }, while in others, it does not. Disadvantages to turn lanes include increased pavement area, with associated increases in construction and maintenance costs, as well as increased amounts of stormwater runoff. They also increase the distance that pedestrians crossing the street are exposed to vehicle traffic. Diagram of an example intersection of two-way streets as seen from above (traffic flows on the right side of the road). The East-West street has left turn lanes from both directions, but the North-South street does not have left turn lanes at this intersection. The East-West street traffic lights also have green left turn arrows to show when unhindered left turns can be made. Some possible markings for crosswalks are shown as examples. [ Fork ] Diagram of a fork. A fork (literally &quot; fork in the road &quot; ) is a type of intersection. When a road splits, the main road steers to the left or right, depending of what side you drive on, and the smaller road heads straight. It is common for 2 lane roads. Heading toward the main road, the traveller must turn left or right. An example of this is the Brevard and Florida Avenue&apos;s intersection in Rockledge, Florida, If a road has a curb that sticks out, it is not classified as a fork. [ Other markings ] In some places, wider white stop lines (see preceding diagram) indicate where vehicles should stop at an intersection when there is a stop sign or a red light in a traffic signal facing them. Some intersections have pedestrian crosswalk s designated on the street pavement. Some possible markings for crosswalks are shown as examples. Note that the stop line is positioned to not allow stopped vehicles to block the crosswalk. Ghost Island priority junctions are sometimes used in the United Kingdom to provide safer turning areas, which separate turning traffic from through traffic in a similar way to turn lanes (see above). [ See also ] At-grade intersection Interchange (road) Junction (traffic) [ References ] [ January 2008 ] [ External links ] Intersection concept for driverless vehicles designed by University of Texas [ Road junctions ] Category:Road junction types Category:Road infrastructure zh:平面道路交叉 bg:Кръстовище da:Kryds (trafik) de:Straßenkreuzung et:Ristmik es:intersección (vial) fa:تقاطع fr:Carrefour ko:교차로 hr:Raskrižje id:Persimpangan it:Intersezione a raso he:צומת lt:Sankryža nl:Kruispunt (verkeer) ja:交差点 pl:Skrzyżowanie ro:Intersecție ru:Перекрёсток sl:Križišče ta:இடைவெட்டுச் சந்தி vi:Nút giao thông cùng mức