{ parament hangs from the } { pulpit, indicating that the current liturgical season is } { Christmastide. The fact that the Christ Candle in the centre of the } { Advent wreath is lit also indicates that } { Christmas has arrived. } Liturgical colours are those specific colours which are used for vestment s and hangings within the context of Christian liturgy. The symbolism of violet, white, green, red, gold, black, rose and other colours may serve to underline moods appropriate to a season of the liturgical year or may highlight a special occasion. There is a distinction between the colour of the vestments worn by the clergy and their choir dress, which with a few exceptions does not change with the liturgical seasons. [ The Roman Rite ] [ Post-1969 Rubrics ] In the Roman Rite, as reformed by Pope Paul VI, the following colours are used. { &apos;&apos;Institutio Generalis Missalis Romani&apos;&apos;, no. 346; cf. text for Australia, England and Wales, United States } [ Green ] Sundays and Ferias in Ordinary Time [ Violet ] Advent Lent Liturgies other than Mass on Holy Saturday Sacrament of Reconciliation Sacrament of the Sick | Gaudete Sunday (Third Sunday of Advent) Laetare Sunday (Fourth Sunday of Lent) All Souls&apos; Day Requiem Masses and offices for the dead Christmastide (from Christmas Day to the Baptism of the Lord ) Easter season Holy Thursday Feasts of Our Lord of a joyful nature (i.e. not those of His Passion) Feasts of Our Lady The optional use of blue as a liturgical colour for feasts of our Lady is restricted to a few dioceses, as explained below. Feasts of The Angels Feast of St. John Feast of the Conversion of St. Paul Nativity of St. John the Baptist Feast of All Saints Feasts of Non-martyred Saints Sacrament of Baptism Sacrament of Matrimony Sacrament of Holy Orders | Requiem Masses and offices for the dead where the Conference of Bishops has permitted it. GIRM (Editio Typica), 346 [ Red ] Palm Sunday Good Friday Pentecost Feasts of the Passion of the Lord Feasts of the Holy Cross Feasts of the Twelve Apostles and Evangelists (except St. John) Feasts of Martyred Saints The Holy Innocents Masses of Confirmation Requiem Masses celebrated by the Pope Requiem Masses of deceased Popes and Cardinals Gaudete Sunday (Third Sunday of Advent) Laetare Sunday (Fourth Sunday of Lent) [ Black ] All Souls&apos; Day Requiem Masses and offices for the dead Good Friday Colour Obligatory Usage Optional Usage White Rose On more solemn days, festive, that is, more precious, sacred vestments may be used, even if not of the colour of the day. Such vestments may, for instance, be made from cloth of gold or cloth of silver. Moreover, the Conference of Bishops may determine and propose to the Apostolic See adaptations suited to the needs and culture of peoples. { GIRM, 346 } Ritual Masses are celebrated in their proper colour, in white, or in a festive colour. Masses for Various Needs, on the other hand, are celebrated in the colour proper to the day or the season or in violet if they bear a penitential character. Votive Masses are celebrated in the colour suited to the Mass itself or even in the colour proper to the day or the season. { GIRM, 347 } [ Regional and situational exceptions ] Some particular variations: Blue, a colour associated with the Virgin Mary, is permitted for the feast of the Immaculate Conception in some dioceses in Spain, Portugal, Mexico and South America. In the Philippines, it is authorised for all feasts of the Virgin Mary, a practise followed in some other places without official warrant. There have also been unauthorised uses of blue in place of violet for the season of Advent, Cantica Nova Puplications, Advent Blues, editorial by Gary D. Penkala, December 2000 as a symbol of expectation and hope - the blue of a new day. White or cloth of gold was traditionally used for the Novena from 16 to 24 December according to a Spanish custom abolished in that country in the 1950s, but still widely observed in the Philippines. White is also used for East Asian Masses for the dead, as white is the traditional colour of mourning in many of the region&apos;s cultures. Furthermore, if not enough vestments of the proper colour are available (particularly in concelebration s ), white may always be substituted. [ Pre-1969 Rubrics ] The Roman Missal as revised by Pope John XXIII in 1962, was authorised for use as an extraordinary form of the Roman Rite by Pope Benedict XVI by the 2007 motu proprio entitled Summorum Pontificum. Pope John XXIII&apos;s revision of the Missal incorporated changes that he had made with his motu proprio Rubricarum instructum of 29 July 1960. { &apos;&apos;Missale Romanum&apos;&apos; 1962 in PDF Format } The following are the small differences between its rules for liturgical colours and the later rules: Ember days Rogation days Vigil of The Immaculate Conception Vigil of Christmas Holy Innocents (when this falls on a weekday) Blessing of Candles and Procession of Purification Septuagesima, Sexagesima, and Quinquagesima Palm Sunday Ferias of Holy Week Pre-Mass blessings and rites of Easter Saturday Pre-Mass blessings and rites of the Vigil of Pentecost Vigil of The Nativity of St. John the Baptist Vigils of the Apostles (Ss. Peter and Paul, Andrew, James, Thomas, Simon and Jude, Matthias ) Vigil of St. Lawrence Vigil of The Assumption All Souls (if the Forty Hours&apos; Devotion is ongoing) Exorcism during the Sacrament of Baptism | Ember days Rogation days Vigil of Christmas Holy Innocents (when this falls on a weekday) Blessing of Candles and Procession of Purification Septuagesima, Sexagesima, and Quinquagesima Palm Sunday (Mass only) Ferias of Holy Week Distribution of Holy Communion on Good Friday Liturgies other than Mass on Holy Saturday Pre-Mass blessings and rites of the Easter Vigil Pre-Mass blessings and rites of the Vigil of Pentecost Vigil of The Nativity of St. John the Baptist Vigil of Ss. Peter and Paul Vigil of St. Lawrence Vigil of The Assumption All Souls (if the Forty Hours&apos; Devotion is ongoing) Exorcism during the Sacrament of Baptism | Ember days Rogation days Vigil of Christmas Septuagesima, Sexagesima, and Quinquagesima Palm Sunday (Mass only) Ferias of Holy Week Distribution of Holy Communion on Good Friday Liturgies other than Mass on Holy Saturday Pre-Mass blessings and rites of the Easter Vigil Pre-Mass blessings and rites of the Vigil of Pentecost Vigil of The Nativity of St. John the Baptist Vigil of Ss. Peter and Paul Vigil of St. Lawrence Vigil of The Assumption All Souls (if the Forty Hours&apos; Devotion is ongoing) Exorcism during the Sacrament of Baptism Octave of The Immaculate Conception Octave of Christmas Octave of St. John Vigil of The Epiphany Octave of The Epiphany Purification (Mass only) Octave of St. Joseph Vigil of Easter on Holy Saturday (Mass only) Octave of Easter Vigil of The Ascension Octave of The Ascension Octave of Corpus Christi Octave of The Sacred Heart Octave of The Nativity of St. John the Baptist Octave of The Assumption Octave of The Nativity of Mary Octave of All Saints Sacrament of Baptism (post-exorcism) Sacrament of Confirmation | Octave of Christmas Purification (Mass only) Easter Vigil (Mass only) Octave of Easter Vigil of The Ascension Sacrament of Baptism (post-exorcism) Sacrament of Confirmation | Octave of Christmas Purification (including Blessing of Candles, Procession and Mass) Easter Vigil (Mass only) Octave of Easter Vigil of The Ascension Sacrament of Baptism (post-exorcism) Sacrament of Confirmation Holy Innocents (when this falls on a Sunday) Octave of The Holy Innocents Octave of St. Stephen Vigil of Pentecost (Mass only) Octave of Pentecost Octave of Ss. Peter and Paul Octave of St. Lawrence | Holy Innocents (when this falls on a Sunday) Blessing of Palms and Procession on Palm Sunday Vigil of Pentecost (Mass only) Octave of Pentecost | Holy Innocents Blessing of Palms and Procession on Palm Sunday Vigil of Pentecost (Mass only) Octave of Pentecost Gaudete Sunday Laetare Sunday | Gaudete Sunday Laetare Sunday | Gaudete Sunday Laetare Sunday Good Friday All Souls (unless the Forty Hours&apos; Devotion is ongoing) Requiem Masses | Good Friday (main liturgy) All Souls (unless the Forty Hours&apos; Devotion is ongoing) Requiem Masses | Good Friday (main liturgy) All Souls (unless the Forty Hours&apos; Devotion is ongoing) Requiem Masses Colour 1920-1955 Usage 1955-1960 Usage 1960-1969 Usage Violet White Red Rose Black Pope Pius X raised the rank of Sundays of ordinary time, so that on those that fell within octaves green was used instead of the colour of the octave, as had previously been the rule. { Rubricae generales Missalis: XVIII – De Coloribus Paramentorum in the 1920 typical edition of the Roman Missal omitted the phrase &quot; exceptis Dominicis infra octavas occurrentibus, in quibus color octavarum servatur &quot; found in earlier editions beginning with Pope Pius V&apos;s edition of 1570 (page 21 of the facsimile published by Libreria Editrice Vaticana in 1998 – ISBN 88-209-2547-8). } The rules on liturgical colours before the time of Pope Pius X were essentially those indicated in the edition of the Roman Missal that Pope Pius V promulgated in 1570, except for the addition of feasts not included in his Missal. The scheme of colours in his Missal reflected usage that had become fixed in Rome by the twelfth century. [ Byzantine Rite ] The Byzantine Rite, which is used by all the member churches of the Eastern Orthodox Church and the Eastern Catholic Churches of Byzantine Rite, does not have a universal system of colours, with the service-books of the Byzantine tradition only specifying &quot; light &quot; or &quot; dark &quot; vestments in the service books. In the Greek tradition, maroon or burgundy are common for solemn feast days, and a wide variety of colours are used at other times, the most common of which are gold and white. Slavic-use churches and others influenced by Western traditions have adopted a cycle of liturgical colours. The particulars may change from place to place, but generally: When no other colour is specified Feasts of the Theotokos | Churches dedicated to the Theotokos may use light blue for the default, instead of gold. Saturdays and Sundays during Great Lent Holy Thursday Feast of the Cross Feast of John the Baptist Feasts of Martyrs Nativity Fast Apostles&apos; Fast Dormition Fast (except during one of the Great Feasts of the Lord or Theotokos) Palm Sunday Pentecost Feasts of Venerable ( Monastic ) Saints | Feast of the Cross in some places Weekdays during Great Lent Weekdays during Holy Week (except Holy Thursday) Pascha Nativity Theophany Other Great Feasts of the Lord | Funerals Colour Common Usage Other Usage/Notes Gold Light Blue Purple or Dark Red Red Green Black White The colours would be changed before Vespers on the eve of the day being commemorated. During Great Feasts, the colour is changed before the vespers service that begins the first day of a forefeast, and remains until the apodosis (final day of the afterfeast ). Under Western influence, black is often used for funerals, weekdays in Great Lent and Holy Week in the Slavic churches, as a sign of penance and mourning, but in the second half of the 20th century, the ancient white became more common, as a sign of the hope of the Resurrection. [ Russian Liturgical Colours ] According to the Russian Orthodox Church &apos;s Nastol&apos;naya Kniga Sviashchenno-sluzhitelia, { Nastol&apos;naya Kniga Sviashchenno-sluzhitelia, Volume 4, Moscow,1983, Translated in &quot; The Messenger &quot; of St. Andrew&apos;s Russian Orthodox Cathedral,Philadelphia, June, July–August, September, 1990. } up to eight different liturgical colours may be used throughout the year. Exact usage of these colours varies, but the following are the most common uses. Feasts of the Lord Jesus Christ Feasts of Prophets Feasts of Apostles Feasts of Holy Hierarchs When no other colour is specified Feasts of the Theotokos Presentation of the Lord Annunciation Feasts of Bodiless Powers Feasts of Virgins | Fifth Friday of Lent Dormition Fast until Elevation of the Cross, or even Advent (Carpatho-Russians) Cross of Our Lord Great and Holy Thursday Weekends of Lent | Weekdays of Lent Feasts of Martyrs Feast of Saints Peter and Paul Advent Feasts of Angels Elevation of the Cross | Pascha (Mount Athos and Jerusalem) Nativity (Mount Athos and Jerusalem) Palm Sunday Pentecost Holy Spirit Day Feasts of Monastic Saints Feasts of Ascetics Feasts of Fools for Christ Feasts of Prophets Feasts of Angels | Pentecost until Saints Peter and Paul (Carpatho-Russians) Weekdays in Lent | Weekday funerals, memorials, and liturgies (Carpatho-Russians) Epiphany Transfiguration Paschal season Funerals | Theophany Christmas Day | Saints Peter and Paul fast Feast of Saints Peter and Paul until Transfiguration Colour Common Usage Uncommon/Other Usage Gold Light Blue Purple or Dark Red Red Green Black White Orange or Rust [ Coptic and Ethiopic Rites ] The Coptic tradition, followed also in Ethiopia and Eritrea, uses only white vestments, with gold and silver being considered variations of white. [ Anglicanism ] { George Pace at } { St Augustine&apos;s, Edgbaston } Most Anglican churches use the colours appointed in the Roman Rite, usually in its post-1969 form, with the exception of Sarum Blue replacing Violet for Advent, but some use the earlier form, with, for instance, black in place of red on Good Friday. Some churches use black at masses for the dead, but more commonly white or purple is used. For historical reasons much of the worldwide Anglican Communion takes a noticeable lead from the practice of the Church of England. Since the 1980 Alternative Service Book liturgical colours have been recommended for seasons, with more detailed advice offered as part of the Common Worship series of liturgies, including colours for all Sundays and festivals printed in the &apos;core volume&apos; next to collects. The Church&apos;s published Lectionary now makes detailed suggestions for liturgical colour throughout the year, which corresponds almost exactly with the above table of Roman Rite (post-1969 usage) usage with five minor exceptions, and one more significant one: there is no reference in Anglican usage to masses of deceased popes and cardinals; no liturgical colour at all is suggested for Holy Saturday (the words &quot; hangings removed &quot; are printed); the recommendation of red for confirmation rites is extended also to ordination rites; Lenten Array (unbleached linen) continues to be listed as an alternative option to purple during Lent; the option exists for using red instead of green during the &quot; Kingdom Season &quot;, the four last Sundays of the liturgical year, culminating in Christ the King, as is common is some Lutheran traditions (see below); finally, more significantly, the Church of England provision suggests white throughout the Sundays after Epiphany as a distinct &quot; Epiphany season &quot;, with ordinary time commencing the day after Candlemas. The Church of England suggested scheme of colours also indicates where gold vestments should be used in those churches which possess both gold and white as distinct colours. The use of rose-pink vestments, as in the Roman Rite table above, was mentioned as an option in early editions of Common Worship, { The use of rose-pink vestments is suggested in the liturgical colour sequence notes of } { Common Worship of which an on-line version may be found here. } and is a listed option in the annual published lectionary; however, later Common Worship publications have begun to refer to this practice as &quot; traditional &quot; reflecting its resurgence. { For example, see &quot; Common Worship - Times &amp; Seasons &quot;, added to the Common Worship series in 2006, page 50, paragraph 1: &quot; rose-pink vestments are traditionally worn &quot;. } [ Lutheranism ] The Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, uses the same colour scheme as that of the Anglicans and their Scandinavian Lutheran counterparts, but with the use of gold only for the Easter Vigil and Easter Sunday services, with Holy Week using scarlet in place of crimson – congregations lacking scarlet vestments use purple from Palm Sunday through Holy Wednesday and white for Maundy Thursday. Black, traditionally used by the Anglican Communion for Good Friday and funerals, was used by the ELCA only for Ash Wednesday, but effective with the new Evangelical Lutheran Worship (ELW) book, which replaces the Lutheran Book of Worship (LBW), black is no longer suggested for Ash Wednesday or Good Friday – purple may be used for Ash Wednesday and no colour for Good Friday. In addition, the ELW suggests that blue, the traditional colour for Advent (with purple being the alternate), be used for the Advent season, reflecting the traditional use of blue in the Scandinavian Lutheran churches. Both the Lutheran Church - Missouri Synod (LCMS) and the Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod (WELS), along with the United Methodist Church use a similar system, but with purple being the primary colour for both Advent and Lent (with blue being the alternate colour for Advent only), and the use of gold in place of white for both Christmas and Easter (in similar practice to the Roman Catholic Church). In the WELS, the use of red is also done during the Period of End Times, a period of the Church in regards to the teachings of the Book of Revelation, culminating in the creation of the New Jerusalem (corresponding to Christ the King in the ELCA). In all three churches, including the ELCA, red is also worn on the last Sunday of October, in celebration of the Reformation on October 31, when Martin Luther nailed the 95 Theses onto the door of Wittenberg Castle Church. [ Other Protestants ] Some Protestant churches, historically especially Methodists, and today many mainline Protestants, use a colour scheme similar to those used by Anglicans and Roman Catholics, although the practice is not universally followed. Many Protestant churches do not use liturgical colours at all. The United Methodist Church, prior to the early-1990s, used red solely for Pentecost, even including the Sundays after Pentecost Sunday, with the use of green being reserved for the season of Kingdomtide, which usually lasted from late August/early September until Christ the King (the last Sunday in Kingdomtide). Since the publication of the 1992 Book of Worship, the UMC has followed the ELCA practice of wearing red only for Pentecost and Reformation Sundays and green for the rest of the Pentecost season. The Presbyterian Church (USA) has sanctioned the use of liturgical colours and promoted their use in the 1993 Book of Common Worship (although their use was also promoted in the church&apos;s annual Planning Calendars beginning in the 1980s). Advent and Lent are periods of preparation and repentance and are represented by the colour purple. The feasts of Christmas Day and Christmastide, Epiphany Sunday, Baptism of the Lord Sunday, Transfiguration Sunday, Easter Season, Trinity Sunday, and Christ the King Sunday are represented by white. Green is the colour for periods of Ordinary Time. Red is for Pentecost Sunday, but may also be used for ordinations, church anniversaries, and memorial services for ordained clergy. Red or purple is appropriate for Palm Sunday. During Holy Week, the church may use purple or remain bare (although a few churches will use black for Good Friday). Similarly, the United Church of Christ includes indications of which liturgical colour to use for each Sunday in its annual calendar. The general Western pattern is followed, with either Purple or Blue recommended for Advent. [ References ] Ordo missae celebrandae et divini officii persolvendi secundum calendarium romanum generale pro anno liturgico 2005-2006, Libreria Editrice Vaticana, 2005. [ External links ] [ http://www.newadvent.org/cathen/04134a.htm Liturgical colours ] Christian Symbols, Crosses, Parament Colours; and their meanings -- Trinity Lutheran Church, Billings, Montana Protestant liturgical colours online [ collapsed ] Category:Catholic liturgy Category:Mass (liturgy) Category:Christian liturgy, rites, and worship services cs:Liturgická barva da:Liturgiske farver de:Liturgische Farben es:Colores litúrgicos eo:Liturgiaj koloroj fr:Couleur liturgique id:Warna-warna liturgi it:Colori liturgici li:Liturgische kleure hu:Liturgikus színek a katolikus egyházban nl:Liturgische kleur no:Liturgisk farge nn:Liturgiske fargar pl:Kolory liturgiczne pt:Cores litúrgicas na Igreja Católica Apostólica Romana ru:Литургические цвета в римском обряде fi:Liturgiset värit sv:Liturgisk färg