[ Japanese Beetle Popillia japonica.jpg Animal ia Arthropod a Insect a Coleoptera Scarabaeidae Popillia P. japonica Popillia japonica Newman, 1841 ] [ the green beetles of southwestern United States and Mexico Figeater beetle ] The beetle species Popillia japonica is commonly known as the Japanese beetle. It is about [ 15 mm 1 ] long and [ 10 mm 1 ] wide, with iridescent copper-colored elytra and green thorax and head. It is not very destructive in Japan, where it is controlled by natural predators, but in America it is a serious pest of about 200 species of plants, including rose bushes, grape s, hops, canna, crape myrtle s, and others. It is a clumsy flier, dropping several centimeters when it hits a wall. Japanese beetle traps therefore consist of a pair of crossed walls with a bag underneath, and are baited with floral scent, pheromone, or both. However, studies done at the University of Kentucky suggest traps attract more beetles than they actually trap, thus causing more damage along the flight path of the beetles and in the vicinity of the trap than may have occurred if the trap were not present. [ http://www.ca.uky.edu/entomology/entfacts/ef409.asp University of Kentucky Managing Japanese Beetles ] These insects damage plants by skeletonizing the foliage, that is, consuming only the leaf material between the veins. [ History ] As the name suggests, the Japanese beetle is native to Japan. The insect was first found in the United States in 1916 in a nursery near Riverton, New Jersey. It is thought the beetle larvae entered the United States in a shipment of iris bulbs prior to 1912, when inspections of commodities entering the country began. &quot; The first Japanese beetle found in Canada was in a tourist&apos;s car at Yarmouth, arriving in Nova Scotia by ferry from Maine in 1939. During the same year, three additional adults were captured at Yarmouth and three at Lacolle in southern Quebec. &quot; { Japanese Beetle, Canadian Food Inspection Agency } [ Life cycle ] A typical cluster of Japanese beetle eggs Japanese beetle larva( grub worm ) Japanese beetle pupa Japanese beetle adult Mating, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada Feeding, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada The life cycle of the Japanese beetle is typically one year in most parts of the United States, but this can be extended in cooler climates; for instance, in its native Japan, the beetle&apos;s life cycle is two years long as a result of the higher latitudes of the grasslands required for the larval stage. During the larval stage, the white grubs can be identified by their V-shaped raster pattern. [ Control ] Map showing the parts of the United States currently infested by Japanese beetles During the larval stage, the Japanese beetle lives in lawn s and other grassland s, where it eats the roots of grasses. During that stage, it is susceptible to a fatal disease called milky spore disease, caused by a bacterium called milky spore, Paenibacillus (formerly Bacillus) popilliae. The USDA developed this biological control and it is commercially available in powder form for application to lawn areas. Standard applications (low density across a broad area) take from one to five years to establish maximal protection against larval survival (depending on climate), expanding through the soil through repeated rounds of infection, in-ver s can be used to exclude the beetles; however, this may necessitate hand pollination of flowers. Kaolin spray s can also be used as barriers. Research performed by many US extension service branches has shown pheromone trap s attract more beetles than they catch. { Japanese Beetle control strategies } Traps are most effective when spread out over an entire community, and downwind and at the borders (i.e., as far away as possible, particularly upwind), of managed property containing plants being protected. Natural repellents include catnip, chives, garlic, and tansy, { pests - selfsufficientish - pests. } as well as the remains of dead beetles, but these methods have limited effectiveness. Additionally, when present in small numbers, the beetles may be manually controlled using a soap-water spray mixture, shaking a plant in the morning hours and disposing of the fallen beetles, or simply picking them off attractions such as rose flowers, since the presence of beetles attracts more beetles to that plant. A natural predator of the beetle is the anchor bug. [ Host plants ] Japanese beetles feed on a large range of hosts, including leaves of plants of the following common crops: { Japanese Beetle, Canadian Food Inspection Agency } Bean s, strawberries, tomato es, pepper s, grape s, hops, rose s, cherries, plum s, pear s, peach es, raspberries, blackberries, corn, peas, blueberries, and these genera: [ 10em ] Abelmoschus Acer Aesculus Alcea Aronia Asparagus Aster Betula (birch trees) Buddleja Calluna Caladium Canna Chaenomeles Cirsium Cosmos Crab Apple Dahlia Daucus Dendranthema Digitalis Dolichos Echinacea Hemerocallis Heuchera Hibiscus Humulus Hydrangea Ilex Impatiens Ipomoea (morning glory) Iris Lagerstroemia Liatris Ligustrum Malus (apple) Malva Myrica Ocimum (basil) Oenothera Parthenocissus Phaseolus Phlox Physocarpus Pistacia Platanus Polygonum Populus Prunus Quercus Ribes (gooseberry, currants, etc.) Rheum Rhododendron Rosa Rubus (raspberry, blackberry, etc.) Salix (willows) Sambucus Sassafras Solanum Syringa Thuja (arborvitae) Tilia (linden, lime, or basswood trees) Toxicodendron Ulmus Vaccinium Viburnum Vitis Weigelia Wisteria Zea Zinnia [ References ] [ Popillia japonica Japanese beetle ] [ Popillia japonica Japanese beetle ] [ External links ] APHIS web page on beetle management Japanese beetle on the UF / IFAS Featured Creatures Web site Japanese Beetle, Canadian Food Inspection Agency Organic methods of Japanese Beetle Control Category:Scarabaeidae Category:Agricultural pest insects Category:Insect pests of ornamental plants Category:Invasive animal species Category:Invasive animal species in the United States Category:Beetles of Asia Category:Animals described in 1841 de:Japankäfer fr:Scarabée japonais it:Popillia japonica nl:Japanse kever ja:マメコガネ no:Japanbille pt:Popillia japonica ru:Японский жук