[ Livonian Brothers of the Sword (Fratres militiæ Christi Livoniae) 100px 1. Seal of the Swordbrothers 2.Coat of Arms of the Swordbrothers 1204–1237 Terra Mariana Roman Catholic Church Wenden (Cēsis), Fellin (Viljandi), Segewold (Sigulda). Ascheraden (Aizkraukle), Goldingen (Kuldīga), Marienburg (Alūksne), Reval (Tallinn), Weißenstein (Paide) Livonian Crusade Master Wenno, Master Volquin ] The Livonian Brothers of the Sword ( [ Fratres militiæ Christi Livoniae ], [ Schwertbrüderorden ] ) were a military order founded by Bishop Albert of Riga in 1202. Pope Innocent III sanctioned the establishment in 1204. The membership of the order comprised German &quot; warrior monk s &quot;. Alternative names of the Order include the Christ Knights, Sword Brethren, and The Militia of Christ of Livonia. Following their defeat by the Samogitians and Semigallians in the Battle of Schaulen (Saule) in 1236, the surviving Brothers merged into the Teutonic Order as an autonomous branch and became known as the Livonian Order. [ History ] Swordbrothers Albert, Bishop of Riga (or Prince-Bishop of Livonia ), founded the Brotherhood in 1202 to aid the Bishopric of Livonia in the conversion of the pagan Livonians, Latgalians and Selonians living across the ancient trade routes from the Gulf of Riga eastwards. From its foundation, the undisciplined Order tended to ignore its supposed vassal age to the bishops. In 1218 Albert asked King Valdemar II of Denmark for assistance, but Valdemar instead arranged a deal with the Brotherhood and conquered the northern Estonia (now known as Danish Estonia) for Denmark. The Brotherhood had its headquarters at Fellin (Viljandi) in present-day Estonia, where the walls of the Master&apos;s castle [ 2009 still ] stand. Other strongholds included Wenden (Cēsis), Segewold (Sigulda) and Ascheraden (Aizkraukle). The commanders of Fellin, Goldingen (Kuldīga), Marienburg (Alūksne), Reval (Tallinn), and the bailiff of Weißenstein (Paide) belonged to the five-member entourage of the Order&apos;s Master. Pope Gregory IX asked the Brothers to defend Finland from the Novgorodian attacks in his letter of November 24, 1232. { Letter by Pope Gregory IX. (In Latin) Hosted by the National Archive of Finland. See &apos;&apos;Diplomatarium Fennicum&apos;&apos; } However, no known information regarding the knights&apos; possible activities in Finland has survived. ( Sweden eventually conquered Finland following the Second Swedish Crusade in 1249.) The Order was decimated in the Battle of Schaulen (Saule) in 1236 against Lithuanians and Semigallians. { Andrejs Plakans, A Concise History of the Baltic States, (Cambridge University Press, 2011), 44. } This disaster led the surviving Brothers to become incorporated into the Order of Teutonic Knights in the following year, and from that point on they became known as the Livonian Order. { Andrejs Plakans, A Concise History of the Baltic States, 44. } They continued, however, to function in all respects ( rule, clothing and policy) as an autonomous branch of the Teutonic Order, headed by their own Master (himself de jure subject to the Teutonic Order&apos;s Grand Master ). [ Masters ] Wenno (von Rohrbach) 1204–1209 Volkwin (Schenk von Winterstein) 1209–1236 [ In Popular Culture ] In the beginning of Vampire: The Masquerade - Redemption, the protagonist Christof Romuald is a human crusader who fights as a member of the order (referred to in-game as the Swordbrethren) in an alternate history Europe populated by vampires and other monstrous forces. [ See also ] Teutonic Order Battle of Saule Livonian Crusade Northern Crusades Order of Dobrin Teutonic Knights [ Gallery ] The Livonian Confederation in 1260. The Mecklenburgian swordbrother Helmold III. von Plesse. [ References ] Category:1202 establishments Category:1237 disestablishments Category:History of Estonia Category:History of Latvia Category:History of Lithuania (1219–1569) Category:Catholic chivalric orders Category:Livonia Category:Livonian Confederation Category:Military orders Category:Northern Crusades ar:النظام الليفوني an:Orden d&apos;os Portaespatas be:Ордэн мечаносцаў be-x-old:Ордэн мечаносцаў ca:Germans Livonians de l&apos;Espasa cv:Хĕçпе çӳрекенсен орденĕ cs:Řád mečových bratří da:Sværdbroderordenen de:Schwertbrüderorden et:Mõõgavendade ordu el:Τάγμα των Αδελφών του ξίφους es:Hermanos Livonios de la Espada fr:Chevaliers Porte-Glaive ko:리보니아 검의 형제 기사단 id:Livonian Brothers of the Sword it:Cavalieri portaspada lv:Zobenbrāļu ordenis lt:Kalavijuočių ordinas hu:Kardtestvérek rendje nl:Orde van de Zwaardbroeders ja:リヴォニア帯剣騎士団 no:Sverdbroderordenen pl:Kawalerowie mieczowi pt:Irmãos Livônios da Espada ru:Орден меченосцев sk:Rád mečových bratov fi:Kalparitaristo sv:Svärdsriddarorden tr:Livonyalı Kılıç Kardeşleri uk:Орден мечоносців zh:宝剑骑士团