[ November 2009 ] [ November 2009 ] [ 1995 12 24 ] [ 1996 7 26 ] { (with } { Joe&apos;s Apartment ) } { 30 min. } { English } { £1.3 Million } A Close Shave is a 1995 British animated short film directed by Nick Park at Aardman Animations in Bristol, featuring his characters Wallace and Gromit. It was his third half-hour short featuring the eccentric inventor Wallace and his quiet but intelligent dog Gromit, following 1989&apos;s A Grand Day Out, and 1993&apos;s The Wrong Trousers. It was released theatrically in the United States with Pocahontas. To celebrate the film&apos;s premiere on December 24, 1995, BBC Two &apos;s Christmas presentation that year (broadcast from 17 to 22 December) featured Wallace and Gromit. The main ident featured the two (Wallace wears a red crown and Gromit wears a green crown) eating Christmas dinner, with a large blue 2 (the channel&apos;s logo) situated in the middle of the table, covered with flashing Christmas lights. Several Christmas themed stings also involving Wallace, Gromit, and the 2 were shown between programmes. The animation of these idents appeared slightly different from other Wallace and Gromit shorts. Following in the footsteps of its predecessor The Wrong Trousers, A Close Shave won the Academy Award for Best Animated Short Film in 1996. [ Summary ] In the middle of a night, a small sheep escapes from a mysterious lorry and enters the house of Wallace and Gromit, who are currently running a window-cleaning business. The next morning, Wallace and Gromit fail to notice the sheep chewing at their food and furniture before they leave for work. While they clean the windows of a wool shop, Wallace meets and falls in love with Wendolene Ramsbottom, the shopkeeper. She is the daughter of a late inventor and owns a sinister dog called Preston, who runs a sheep-rustling scheme to supply the shop. After returning from work they find the sheep, who has been damaging their furniture and is now messy. To clean him up, Wallace puts the sheep into one of his inventions, the Knit-o-Matic machine, to clean him by programming it to &quot; Wash &quot;. Unfortunately, the machine develops a fault and changes the setting to &quot; Light Shave &quot;, and proceeds to suck the sheep into the rest of the machine, give him a shear and knits his wool into a small sweater. The sheep emerges from the machine shivering but mostly unharmed; Wallace names him &quot; Shaun &quot; (a pun on the word &quot; shorn &quot; ) and dresses him in the sweater. Preston spies on the scene while hidden in a drain and after they leave, he sneaks in and steals the design blueprints for the machines. The next day, Wallace and Gromit are cleaning the clock tower outside Wendolene&apos;s shop, and Wallace pays Wendolene another visit. Gromit attempts to investigate what Preston is doing, but ends up getting framed for the sheep rustling and captured by Preston. Gromit is handed into the authorities and sentenced to life in prison while Wallace finds his house overrun with sheep. Wallace, Shaun and the other sheep rescue Gromit from prison and they hide out in the fields, where Wallace attempts to talk Gromit into leaving the country. Wendolene and Preston arrive and round up the sheep, but Wendolene confronts her dog and tells him to stop the sheep thefts after seeing him threatening Shaun. Instead, Preston turns on her, locks her in the lorry with the captured sheep and drives away. Witnessing this, Wallace and Gromit give chase on their motorbike, hoping to save Wendolene and the sheep, as well as clear Gromit&apos;s name of the thefts. During the chase, the sidecar Gromit rides in is separated, and it heads down another road and flies off the edge of a cliff. Luckily, Gromit saves himself by activating the sidecar&apos;s ability to turn itself into an aeroplane, and flies after Wallace&apos;s motorbike and the lorry. Both of their attempts to stop Preston are unsuccesful and Wallace accidentally gets himself trapped inside with Wendolene and the sheep. The lorry enters Preston&apos;s factory, where Preston has used the stolen blueprints to build a giant replica of the Knit-o-Matic machines, much to Wallace&apos;s objections ( &quot; That&apos;s MY machine! I&apos;ve got patent-pending on that! &quot; ). It turns out that Prestion is using the sheep thefts and the machines for his true goal: to use the sheep&apos;s meat to secure his own brand of dog food for profit. The captives are loaded into the wash basin, with Shaun escaping, and Preston pulls out the nozzle to suck them into the Knit-o-Matic. As Wallace and Wendolene fight against the suction force, Shaun manages to activate the neon advertisements, revealing the factories location to Gromit, who then flies into the hideout and attacks Preston with the porridge cannon. Shaun is then able to pull the nozzle away to suck Preston into the Knit-o-Matic, which Gromit programs to give a &quot; Close Shave &quot;. During the shearing, Preston breaks out of the machine, revealing himself to be a robotic dog, who was built by Wendolene&apos;s father to serve as a pet but now has gone rogue. Unable to see after being dressed in a sweater knitted by the machine of his fake fur, Preston blunders around and accidentally loads them onto the conveyor belt of his &quot; Mutton-o-Matic &quot; machine. As they all fight against the conveyor belt, Shaun swings over on an anvil and knocks Preston into the machine, where he is destroyed and packaged into dog food cans. At the end of the film, Gromit is exonerated from all charges of the thefts, Wallace has rebuilt Preston with normal dog behavior and a remote control, and Wendolene stops by to thank him. However, when Wallace invites her in, he learns she is allergic to cheese, much to his dismay ( &quot; What&apos;s wrong with Wensleydale ? &quot; ). As before, the 30 minutes are packed with sight gags and exaggerated physical comedy, as well as a few subtle film parodies. Voice acting was before the sole duty of Peter Sallis (the voice of Wallace), as Gromit is always silent. In &apos;A Close Shave&apos;, Wendolene was introduced as the second speaking character for the series, voiced by Anne Reid. [ Sequels ] After A Close Shave, Wallace and Gromit &apos;s next major outing was in a set of 10 2½-minute shorts called Cracking Contraptions, each showing one of Wallace&apos;s inventions, usually with disastrous results. These appeared on the Internet and were also released as a limited edition Region 2 DVD, later on the Curse of the Were-Rabbit DVD. The sequel to A Close Shave is the feature film Wallace &amp; Gromit: The Curse of the Were-Rabbit. The next major short was A Matter of Loaf and Death, first broadcast in Britain on Christmas Day 2008. [ Spin-Off ] Shaun, the youngest of the flock of sheep in this feature, proved to be a very popular character and was given his own highly successful TV series on the BBC entitled, &quot; Shaun the Sheep &quot; which has also been broadcast worldwide and currently the first two seasons (80 episodes, each approx 7 minutes long) are available on DVD. Though it&apos;s never explicitly stated as part of the canon, it can be surmised that Wallace sold off the entire flock to &quot; The Farmer &quot; who owns the farm where Shaun and his friends now reside. Each episode contains slapstick and situational humor with Shaun as the leader of the flock dealing with everyday farm issues while exhibiting a high level of intelligence and human-like behavior to a level much like Gromit. &quot; Shaun the Sheep &quot; the series itself has spun off another very successful series aimed for toddlers entitled &quot; Timmy Time &quot;, Timmy being a baby sheep in Shaun&apos;s flock with misadventures of his own. [ External links ] [ 0112691 ] [ Wallace and Gromit ] [ Animation United Kingdom Film Television BBC ] Category:1995 films Category:Animated comedy films Category:BBC television programmes Category:Children&apos;s fantasy films Category:Ghibli Museum Library films Category:Wallace and Gromit Category:Stop-motion animated films Category:Best Animated Short Academy Award winners Category:Films featuring anthropomorphic characters de:Wallace &amp; Gromit – Unter Schafen es:Un esquilado apurado fr:Rasé de près it:Una tosatura perfetta nl:A Close Shave (1995) pl:Wallace i Gromit: Golenie owiec ru:Невероятные приключения Уоллеса и Громита: Стрижка «под ноль» fi:Läheltä piti