[ 1955 film television radio ] The year 1955 in film involved some significant events. { TOC } [ Events ] November 3 - The musical Guys and Dolls, starring Marlon Brando and Frank Sinatra, debuts. June 27 - The last ever Republic serial, King of the Carnival, is released. September 30 - American Actor James Dean died in a car crash. [ Top grossing films (U.S.) ] [ March 2011 ] Rank Title Studio Actors Gross 1. Lady and the Tramp * Walt Disney Productions $100,249,000 2. Mister Roberts Warner Bros. Henry Fonda, James Cagney and William Powell $9,900,000 3. Guys and Dolls MGM Marlon Brando, Jean Simmons and Frank Sinatra $7,875,000 4. Rebel Without a Cause Warner Bros. James Dean, Natalie Wood and Sal Mineo $7,100,000 5. The Seven Year Itch 20th Century Fox Marilyn Monroe and Tom Ewell $6,875,000 6. Picnic Columbia William Holden and Kim Novak $6,350,000 7. Oklahoma! Magna/RKO/20th Century Fox Gordon MacRae, Gloria Grahame and Shirley Jones $6,275,000 8. Love Me or Leave Me MGM Doris Day and James Cagney $6,150,000 9. The Sea Chase Warner Bros. John Wayne and Lana Turner $6,000,000 10. East of Eden Warner Bros. James Dean $5,850,000 (*) After theatrical re-issue(s) [ Awards ] Academy Awards : Best Picture : Marty - Hecht-Lancaster, United Artists Best Director : Delbert Mann - Marty Best Actor : Ernest Borgnine - Marty Best Actress : Anna Magnani - The Rose Tattoo Best Supporting Actor : Jack Lemmon - Mister Roberts Best Supporting Actress : Jo Van Fleet - East of Eden Golden Globe Awards : Drama: Best Picture : East of Eden Best Actor : Ernest Borgnine - Marty Best Actress : Anna Magnani - The Rose Tattoo Musical or comedy: Best Picture : Guys and Dolls Best Actor : Tom Ewell - The Seven Year Itch Best Actress : Jean Simmons - Guys and Dolls Other Best Director : Joshua Logan - Picnic Best Foreign Film : Ordet (The Word), Denmark Best Foreign Film : Stella, Greece Best Foreign Film : Sons, Mothers, and a General, West Germany Best Foreign Film : Eyes of Children, Japan Palme d&apos;Or (Cannes Film Festival): Marty, directed by Delbert Mann, United States Golden Lion (Venice Film Festival): Ordet (The Word), directed by Carl Theodor Dreyer, Denmark Golden Bear (Berlin Film Festival): Die Ratten (The Rats), directed by Robert Siodmak, West Germany [ Films released in 1955 ] U.S.A. unless stated 5 Against the House, starring Kim Novak, Guy Madison and Brian Keith A Abbott and Costello Meet the Keystone Kops, starring Bud Abbott and Lou Costello Abbott and Costello Meet the Mummy, starring Bud Abbott and Lou Costello Above Us the Waves, starring John Mills - ( U.K. ) The Adventures of Quentin Durward, starring Robert Taylor and Kay Kendall All That Heaven Allows, starring Jane Wyman and Rock Hudson Anděl na horách - ( Czechoslovakia ) Apache Ambush Artists and Models, starring Dean Martin and Jerry Lewis B Bad Day at Black Rock, directed by John Sturges, starring Spencer Tracy, Robert Ryan, Ernest Borgnine, Lee Marvin and Anne Francis Battle Cry, starring Van Heflin, Aldo Ray and Anne Francis Battle Taxi starring Sterling Hayden, Arthur Franz and Marshall Thompson The Big Combo, starring Cornel Wilde, Richard Conte, Brian Donlevy and Jean Wallace The Big Knife, starring Jack Palance, Ida Lupino, Jean Hagen, Rod Steiger and Shelley Winters Blackboard Jungle, starring Glenn Ford, Anne Francis, Louis Calhern, Sidney Poitier and Vic Morrow Blood Alley, starring John Wayne and Lauren Bacall The Brain Machine directed by Ken Hughes (U.K.) C Carrington V.C., starring David Niven - ( U.K. ) Cast a Dark Shadow, starring Dirk Bogarde - (U.K.) Chief Crazy Horse Cinerama Holiday The Cobweb, directed by Vincente Minelli, starring Richard Widmark, Gloria Grahame and Lauren Bacall The Cockleshell Heroes, directed by and starring José Ferrer with Trevor Howard - (U.K.) The Colditz Story, directed by Guy Hamilton, starring John Mills and Eric Portman - ( U.K. ) Confession directed by Ken Hughes (U.K.) Confidential Report, starring Orson Welles and Michael Redgrave - ( France / Spain / Switzerland ) Continente Perduto (aka Lost Continent ), a documentary from ( Italy ) Count Three and Pray, starring Van Heflin, Joanne Woodward and Raymond Burr The Court-Martial of Billy Mitchell, starring Gary Cooper The Criminal Life of Archibaldo de la Cruz (Ensayo de un Crimen), directed by Luis Buñuel - ( Mexico ) D Daddy Long Legs, starring Fred Astaire and Leslie Caron The Dam Busters, starring Richard Todd and Michael Redgrave - ( U.K. ) Davy Crockett, King of the Wild Frontier Death of a Cyclist (Muerte de un ciclista), directed by Juan Antonio Bardem - ( Spain ) The Deep Blue Sea, staring Vivien Leigh - (U.K.) The Desperate Hours, starring Humphrey Bogart and Fredric March Devdas, based on novel with same name, starring Dilip Kumar, Vyjayanthimala and Suchitra Sen - ( India ) Les Diaboliques (The Devils), directed by Henri-Georges Clouzot, starring Simone Signoret - ( France ) E-F East of Eden, directed by Elia Kazan, starring Julie Harris, James Dean (in his first major role) and Raymond Massey The Far Country, directed by Anthony Mann, starring James Stewart The Far Horizons, starring Fred MacMurray and Charlton Heston The Fast and the Furious, starring John Ireland and Dorothy Malone Floating Clouds (Ukigumo) - ( Japan ) Footsteps in the Fog, starring Stewart Granger and Jean Simmons - ( U.K. ) G-H Galapagos, a documentary by Thor Heyerdahl - ( Norway ) A Generation (Pokolenie), directed by Andrzej Wajda - ( Poland ) Godzilla Raids Again (Gojira no Gyakushū) - ( Japan ) Guys and Dolls, starring Marlon Brando, Jean Simmons, Frank Sinatra and Vivian Blaine Hit the Deck, starring Jane Powell and Debbye Reynolds directed by Roy Rowland House of Bamboo, starring Robert Ryan How to Be Very, Very Popular, starring Betty Grable in her final film role I-J I Live in Fear (Ikimono no kiroku), directed by Akira Kurosawa - ( Japan ) I&apos;ll Cry Tomorrow, starring Susan Hayward Illegal, a film noir starring Edward G. Robinson and Jayne Mansfield Interrupted Melody, starring Eleanor Parker and Glenn Ford It Came from Beneath the Sea It Happened on July 20th (Es geschah am 20. Juli), directed by G. W. Pabst - ( Austria ) It&apos;s Always Fair Weather, starring Gene Kelly, Dan Dailey, Michael Kidd and Cyd Charisse Jedda - ( Australia ) John and Julie starring Peter Sellers and Sid James - ( U.K. ) K-L Kiss Me Deadly, directed by Robert Aldrich, starring Ralph Meeker Lady and the Tramp, an animated Disney musical featuring the voice of Peggy Lee The Ladykillers, directed by Alexander MacKendrick, starring Alec Guinness, Cecil Parker, Herbert Lom and Peter Sellers - ( U.K. ) Land of the Pharaohs, starring Joan Collins and Jack Hawkins The Left Hand of God, starring Humphrey Bogart and Gene Tierney Little Red Monkey, directed by Ken Hughes (U.K.) Lola Montès, directed by Max Ophuls - ( France ) The Long Gray Line, starring Tyrone Power and Maureen O&apos;Hara Love Is a Many-Splendored Thing, starring William Holden and Jennifer Jones Love Me or Leave Me, starring Doris Day and James Cagney Lucy Gallant (reissued as Oil Town) M The Man from Laramie, starring James Stewart The Man with the Golden Arm, starring Frank Sinatra, Eleanor Parker and Kim Novak Man Without a Star Marty, directed by Delbert Mann, starring Ernest Borgnine and Betsy Blair The Miracle of Marcelino (Marcelino Pan Y Vino) - ( Spain ) Mister Roberts, starring Henry Fonda, James Cagney, William Powell and Jack Lemmon Moonfleet Mr. Arkadin, directed by and starring Orson Welles - (France/ Spain / Switzerland ) My Sister Eileen, starring Janet Leigh and Betty Garrett N-O Night and Fog, a documentary directed by Alain Resnais - ( France ) The Night My Number Came Up, starring Michael Redgrave - ( U.K. ) The Night of the Hunter, directed by Charles Laughton, starring Robert Mitchum and Shelley Winters Not as a Stranger, starring Olivia de Havilland and Gloria Grahame Oklahoma! (first film shot in widescreen process known as Todd-AO ), starring Gordon MacRae, Shirley Jones, Rod Steiger, Gloria Grahame, and Gene Nelson Ordet, directed by Carl Theodor Dreyer - ( Denmark ) Othello, starring Sergei Bondarchuk - ( U.S.S.R. ) P-Q Pather Panchali, directed by Satyajit Ray - ( India ) Pete Kelly&apos;s Blues, starring Jack Webb, Janet Leigh, Edmond O&apos;Brien and Peggy Lee. Also features Jayne Mansfield as a cigarette girl. The Phenix City Story Picnic, starring William Holden and Kim Novak Prince of Players, starring Richard Burton Princess Yang Kwei-Fei - ( Japan ) The Prisoner - (U.K.) The Private War of Major Benson, starring Charlton Heston The Prodigal, starring Lana Turner The Quatermass Xperiment, which probably qualifies as the first Hammer horror film - ( U.K. ) Queen Bee, starring Joan Crawford R Die Ratten (The Rats), starring Maria Schell and Curd Jürgens - ( West Germany ) - Golden Bear award Rage at Dawn The Rains of Ranchipur, starring Lana Turner and Richard Burton Rebel Without a Cause, directed by Nicholas Ray, starring James Dean, Sal Mineo and Natalie Wood Reluctant Bride - (U.K.) Richard III, directed by and starring Laurence Olivier with Ralph Richardson, Claire Bloom and John Gielgud - ( U.K. ) Rififi (Du rififi chez les hommes), directed by Jules Dassin - ( France ) The Rose Tattoo, starring Anna Magnani and Burt Lancaster S Samurai II: Duel at Ichijoji Temple (Zoku Miyamoto Musashi: Ichijōji no kettō) - ( Japan ) Scandal in Sorrento (Pane, amore e...), starring Vittorio De Sica and Sophia Loren - ( Italy ) The Scarlet Coat The Sea Chase, starring John Wayne and Lana Turner Seema - ( India ) The Seven Little Foys, starring Bob Hope The Seven Year Itch, starring Marilyn Monroe and Tom Ewell Shree 420, directed by and starring Raj Kapoor with Nargis - ( India ) Sissi, starring Romy Schneider - ( Austria ) Six Bridges to Cross, starring Tony Curtis Smiles of a Summer Night (Sommarnattens leende), directed by Ingmar Bergman - ( Sweden ) Strategic Air Command, starring James Stewart Stella, directed by Michael Cacoyannis, starring Melina Mercouri - ( Greece ) Summertime, directed by David Lean and starring Katharine Hepburn - ( U.K. /U.S.) The Swindlers (Il bidone), directed by Federico Fellini, starring Broderick Crawford - ( Italy ) T-V Tarantula The Tender Trap, starring Frank Sinatra and Debbie Reynolds This Island Earth, starring Jeff Morrow, Rex Reason, and Faith Domergue Three for the Show, starring Betty Grable To Catch a Thief, directed by Alfred Hitchcock, starring Cary Grant and Grace Kelly To Hell and Back starring Audie Murphy, Marshall Thompson, Charles Drake, and David Janssen The Treasure of Pancho Villa Trial The Trouble with Harry, directed by Alfred Hitchcock, starring Edmund Gwenn, John Forsythe and Shirley MacLaine Unknown Soldier (Tuntematon sotilas) - ( Finland ) Unchained Underwater! The Violent Men, starring Glenn Ford and Barbara Stanwyck The Virgin Queen, starring Bette Davis W-Z We&apos;re No Angels, starring Humphrey Bogart and Peter Ustinov White Feather Wichita You&apos;re Never Too Young, starring Dean Martin and Jerry Lewis [ Serials ] The Adventures of Captain Africa King of the Carnival Panther Girl of the Kongo [ Short film series ] Looney Tunes ( 1930 – 1969 ) Terrytoons ( 1930 – 1964 ) Merrie Melodies ( 1931 – 1969 ) Popeye ( 1933 – 1957 ) Donald Duck ( 1934 – 1956 ) The Three Stooges ( 1934 – 1959 ) Tom and Jerry ( 1940 – 1958 ) Bugs Bunny ( 1940 – 1962 ) Mighty Mouse ( 1942 -1955) Chip and Dale ( 1943 – 1956 ) Droopy ( 1943 – 1958 ) Yosemite Sam ( 1945 – 1963 ) Ranger Don ( 1953 – 1956 ) Speedy Gonzales ( 1953 – 1968 ) Cartoon: Good Will to Men (MGM Cartoon Series) (Frederick Quimby, William Hanna and Joseph Barbera, producers; MGM) The Legend of Rockabye Point (Walter Lantz Productions; Universal-International) No Hunting (Donald Duck Series) (Walt Disney Productions; RKO Radio) Speedy Gonzales (Merrie Melodies Series) (Warner Bros. Cartoons, Inc.; Warner Bros.) One-Reel: Gadgets Galore (Warner Varieties Series) (Robert Youngson, producer; Warner Bros.) Survival City (Movietone CinemaScope Series) (Edmund Reek, producer; Twentieth Century-Fox) 3rd Ave. El (Carson Davidson Productions; Ardee Films) Three Kisses (Topper Special Series) (Justin Herman, producer; Paramount) Two-Reel: The Battle of Gettysburg (Dore Schary, producer; MGM) The Face of Lincoln (University of Southern California Presentation; Cavalcade Pictures, Inc.) On The Twelfth Day…(United Kingdom Series) (Go Pictures, Inc.; George Brest and Associates) Switzerland (People and Places Series) (Walt Disney Productions; Buena Vista 24-Hour Alert (Cedric Francis, producer; Warner Bros.) [ Births ] January 6 - Rowan Atkinson, English comedian and actor January 9 - J. K. Simmons, American actor January 18 - Kevin Costner, American actor, producer and director February 7 - Miguel Ferrer, American actor February 15 - Christopher McDonald, American actor February 19 - Jeff Daniels, American actor March 9 - Ornella Muti, Italian actress March 17 - Gary Sinise, American actor, producer and director March 19 - Bruce Willis, American actor March 22 - Lena Olin, Swedish actress April 23 - Judy Davis, Australian actress May 16 - Debra Winger, American actress May 17 - Bill Paxton, American actor May 18 - Chow Yun-fat, Hong Kong actor May 31 - Susie Essman, American actress June 2 - Dana Carvey, American actor and comedian June 8 - Griffin Dunne, American actor and director June 9 - Jimmy Smits, American actor June 27 - Isabelle Adjani, French actress July 22 - Willem Dafoe, American actor August 4 - Billy Bob Thornton, American actor, director and screenwriter August 19 - Peter Gallagher, American actor August 27 - Diana Scarwid, American actress November 13 - Whoopi Goldberg, American actress and comedienne December 3 - Melody Anderson, Canadian actress [ Deaths ] February 12 - Tom Moore, American actor April 7 - Theda Bara, American actress August 5 - Carmen Miranda, Brazilian singer, actress September 30 - James Dean, American actor October 1 - Charles Christie, Canadian pioneer film studio owner in Hollywood November 22 - Shemp Howard, American actor, comedian, of The Three Stooges [ Film Debuts ] James Dean Angie Dickinson Clint Eastwood Dennis Hopper Shirley MacLaine Walter Matthau Melina Mercouri Elizabeth Montgomery Category:Years in film Category:Article Feedback 5 az:1955-ci il filmləri cs:1955 ve filmu de:Filmjahr 1955 es:Anexo:Cine en 1955 fr:1955 au cinéma he:1955 בקולנוע hu:1955 a filmművészetben mk:1955 во филмот nl:Film in 1955 ja:1955年の映画 no:Filmåret 1955 pl:1955 w filmie pt:1955 no cinema ro:1955 în film ru:1955 год в кино sq:1955 në film fi:Elokuvavuosi 1955 sv:Filmåret 1955 uk:1955 у кіно