[ the 1996 science fiction novel Just War (Doctor Who) ] Just war theory (or Bellum iustum) is a doctrine of military ethics of Roman philosophical and Catholic origin, { http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/war/ The first philosophers of just war were } { Aristotle and } { Cicero, and the first theologians } { St. Augustine and } { St. Thomas Aquinas } [ http://www.iep.utm.edu/j/justwar.htm Just War Theory [The Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy &amp; #93; Iep.utm.edu 2009-02-10 2010-03-16 ] studied by moral theologian s, ethicist s and international policy maker s, which holds that a violent conflict ought to meet philosophical, religious or political criteria. [ Origins ] The Indian epic, the Mahabharata, offers one of the first written discussions of a &apos;just war&apos;. In it, one of five ruling brothers asks if the suffering caused by war can ever be justified, and then a long discussion ensues between the siblings, establishing criteria like proportionality (chariots cannot attack cavalry, only other chariots, no attacking people in distress), just means (no poisoned or barbed arrows), just cause (no attacking out of rage), and fair treatment of captives and the wounded { Just War in Comparitive Perspective }. In ancient Rome, a &quot; just cause &quot; for war might include the necessity of repelling an invasion, or retaliation for pillaging or a breach of treaty. { Livy 9.1.10; } { Cicero, } { Divinatio in Caecilium 63; De provinciis consularibus 4; Ad Atticum VII 14, 3; IX 19, 1; Pro rege Deiotauro 13; } { De officiis I 36; Philippicae XI 37; XIII 35; De re publica II 31; III 35; } { Isidore of Seville, Origines XVIII 1, 2; } { Modestinus, Libro I regolarum = } { Digesta I 3, 40; } { E. Badian, Roman Imperialism in the Late Republic (Ithaca 1968, 2nd ed.), p.11. } War was always potentially nefas, &quot; wrong, forbidden, &quot; and risked religious pollution and divine disfavor. { William Warde Fowler, The Roman Festivals of the Period of the Republic (London 1925), pp. 33ff.; M. Kaser, Das altroemische Ius (Goettingen 1949), pp. 22ff; P. Catalano, Linee del sistema sovrannazionale romano (Torino 1965), pp. 14ff.; W. V. Harris, War and imperialism in Republican Rome, 327-70 B.C. (Oxford 1979), pp. 161 ff. } A just war (bellum iustum) thus required a ritualized declaration by the fetial priests. { Livy 1.32; 31.8.3; 36.3.9 } More broadly, conventions of war and treaty-making were part of the ius gentium, the &quot; law of nations, &quot; the customary moral obligations regarded as innate and universal to human beings. { Cicero, De officiis 3.17.69; Marcia L. Colish, The Stoic Tradition from Antiquity to the Early Middle Ages (Brill, 1980), p. 150. } The quintessential explanation of just war theory in the ancient world is found in Cicero&apos;s De Officiis, Book 1, sections 1.11.33–1.13.41. Christian theory of the just war begins with Augustine of Hippo { Christians and War: Augustine of Hippo and the &quot; Just War Theory &quot; } [ March 2010 ] and Thomas Aquinas. { Christians and War: Thomas Aquinas refines the &quot; Just War &quot; Theory } [ March 2010 ] [ The School of Salamanca ] Thomas Aquinas used the authority of Augustine&apos;s arguments in an attempt to define the conditions under which a war could be just: { The Just War } [ The Story of Christianity Justo L. Gonzalez 1984 HarperSanFrancisco ] First, war must occur for a good and just purpose rather than for self-gain (for example, &quot; in the nation&apos;s interest &quot; is not just) or as an exercise of power. Second, just war must be waged by a properly instituted authority such as the state. Third, peace must be a central motive even in the midst of violence. Growing from Aquinas arguments was the School of Salamanca, which expanded on Thomistic understanding of natural law and just war. Given that war is one of the worst evils suffered by mankind, the adherents of the School reasoned that it ought to be resorted to only when it was necessary in order to prevent an even greater evil. A diplomatic agreement is preferable, even for the more powerful party, before a war is started. Examples of &quot; just war &quot; are: In self-defense, as long as there is a reasonable possibility of success. If failure is a foregone conclusion, then it is just a wasteful spilling of blood. Preventive war against a tyrant who is about to attack. War to punish a guilty enemy. A war is not legitimate or illegitimate simply based on its original motivation: it must comply with a series of additional requirements: It is necessary that the response be commensurate to the evil; use of more violence than is strictly necessary would constitute an unjust war. Governing authorities declare war, but their decision is not sufficient cause to begin a war. If the people oppose a war, then it is illegitimate. The people have a right to depose a government that is waging, or is about to wage, an unjust war. Once war has begun, there remain moral limits to action. For example, one may not attack innocents or kill hostages. It is obligatory to take advantage of all options for dialogue and negotiations before undertaking a war; war is only legitimate as a last resort. Under this doctrine, expansionist wars, wars of pillage, wars to convert infidel s or pagans, and wars for glory are all inherently unjust. [ Formally described Just War ] The first work dedicated specifically to it was De bellis justis of Stanisław of Skarbimierz, who justified war of the Kingdom of Poland with Teutonic Knights. Francisco de Vitoria criticized the conquest of America by the Kingdom of Spain. With Alberico Gentili and Hugo Grotius just war theory was replaced by international law theory, codified as a set of rules, which today still encompass the points commonly debated, with some modifications. { Gutman R, Rieff D. } { Crimes of War : What the Public Should Know. New York, NY: } { W. W. Norton &amp; Company; 1999 } The importance of the theory of just war faded with revival of classical republicanism beginning with works of Thomas Hobbes. The Just War theory is an authoritative Catholic Church teaching confirmed by the United States Catholic Bishops in their pastoral letter, The Challenge of Peace: God&apos;s Promise and Our Response, issued in 1983. More recently, the Catechism of the Catholic Church, in paragraph 2309, lists four strict conditions for &quot; legitimate defense by military force &quot; : the damage inflicted by the aggressor on the nation or community of nations must be lasting, grave, and certain; all other means of putting an end to it must have been shown to be impractical or ineffective; there must be serious prospects of success; the use of arms must not produce evils and disorders graver than the evil to be eliminated. The power as well as the precision of modern means of destruction weighs very heavily in evaluating this condition. While Nicholas Adams claims such views have a long tradition, critics claim the application of Just War is only relativistic, and directly contradicts more universal philosophical traditions such as the Ethic of reciprocity. [ February 2007 ] Just War theorists combine both a moral abhorrence towards war with a readiness to accept that war may sometimes be necessary. The criteria of the just war tradition act as an aid to determining whether resorting to arms is morally permissible. Just War theories are attempts &quot; to distinguish between justifiable and unjustifiable uses of organized armed forces &quot;; they attempt &quot; to conceive of how the use of arms might be restrained, made more humane, and ultimately directed towards the aim of establishing lasting peace and justice. &quot; [ http://www.justwartheory.com JustWarTheory.com JustWarTheory.com 2010-03-16 ] The Just War tradition addresses the morality of the use of force in two parts: when it is right to resort to armed force (the concern of jus ad bellum ) and what is acceptable in using such force (the concern of jus in bello ). [ http://www.eppc.org/publications/pubID.1998/pub_detail.asp Home &gt; Publications &gt; Eppc.org 1998-09-01 2010-03-16 ] In more recent years, a third category — jus post bellum — has been added, which governs the justice of war termination and peace agreements, as well as the prosecution of war criminals. Anarcho-capitalist scholar Murray Rothbard stated, &quot; a just war exists when a people tries to ward off the threat of coercive domination by another people, or to overthrow an already-existing domination. A war is unjust, on the other hand, when a people try to impose domination on another people, or try to retain an already existing coercive rule over them. &quot; { This article is based on the talk given by the late Murray N. Rothbard at the Mises Institute’s Costs of War conference in Atlanta, May 1994. It was published in the book of the same name. The audio file of this talk can be found at mises.org: } Jonathan Riley-Smith writes, The consensus among Christians on the use of violence has changed radically since the crusades were fought. The just war theory prevailing for most of the last two centuries — that violence is an evil which can in certain situations be condoned as the lesser of evils — is relatively young. Although it has inherited some elements (the criteria of legitimate authority, just cause, right intention) from the older war theory that first evolved around A.D. 400, it has rejected two premises that underpinned all medieval just wars, including crusades: first, that violence could be employed on behalf of Christ&apos;s intentions for mankind and could even be directly authorized by him; and second, that it was a morally neutral force which drew whatever ethical coloring it had from the intentions of the perpetrators. [ Rethinking the Crusades Catholic Education Resource Center Jonathan R. Smith http://www.catholiceducation.org/articles/history/world/wh0042.html ] [ Criteria of Just War theory ] Just War Theory has two sets of criteria. The first establishing jus ad bellum, the right to go to war; the second establishing jus in bello, right conduct within war. [ Childress, James F. Just-War Theories: The Bases, Interrelations, Priorities, and Functions of Their Criteria Theological Studies 39 1978 427–45 James Childress ] [ Jus ad bellum ] [ Jus ad bellum ] Just cause The reason for going to war needs to be just and cannot therefore be solely for recapturing things taken or punishing people who have done wrong; innocent life must be in imminent danger and intervention must be to protect life. A contemporary view of just cause was expressed in 1993 when the US Catholic Conference said: &quot; Force may be used only to correct a grave, public evil, i.e., aggression or massive violation of the basic human rights of whole populations. &quot; Comparative justice While there may be rights and wrongs on all sides of a conflict, to overcome the presumption against the use of force, the injustice suffered by one party must significantly outweigh that suffered by the other. Some theorists such as Brian Orend omit this term, seeing it as fertile ground for exploitation by bellicose regimes. Competent authority Only duly constituted public authorities may wage war. &quot; A just war must be initiated by a political authority within a political system that allows distinctions of justice. Dictatorships (e.g. Hitler&apos;s Regime) or a deceptive military actions (e.g. the 1968 US bombing of Cambodia) are typically considered as violations of this criterion. The importance of this condition is key. Plainly, we cannot have a genuine process of judging a just war within a system that represses the process of genuine justice. A just war must be initiated by a political authority within a political system that allows distinctions of justice &quot;. Right intention Force may be used only in a truly just cause and solely for that purpose—correcting a suffered wrong is considered a right intention, while material gain or maintaining economies is not. Probability of success Arms may not be used in a futile cause or in a case where disproportionate measures are required to achieve success; Last resort Force may be used only after all peaceful and viable alternatives have been seriously tried and exhausted or are clearly not practical. It may be clear that the other side is using negotiations as a delaying tactic and will not make meaningful concessions. Proportionality The anticipated benefits of waging a war must be proportionate to its expected evils or harms. This principle is also known as the principle of macro-proportionality, so as to distinguish it from the jus in bello principle of proportionality. In modern terms, just war is waged in terms of self-defense, or in defense of another (with sufficient evidence). [ Jus in bello ] Once war has begun, just war theory (Jus in bello) also directs how combatant s are to act or should act: Distinction Just war conduct should be governed by the principle of distinction. The acts of war should be directed towards enemy combatants, and not towards non-combatant s caught in circumstances they did not create. The prohibited acts include bombing civilian residential areas that include no military target and committing acts of terrorism or reprisal against civilians. Proportionality Just war conduct should be governed by the principle of proportionality. An attack cannot be launched on a military objective in the knowledge that the incidental civilian injuries would be clearly excessive in relation to the anticipated military advantage (principle of proportionality). Military necessity Just war conduct should be governed by the principle of minimum force. An attack or action must be intended to help in the military defeat of the enemy, it must be an attack on a military objective, and the harm caused to civilians or civilian property must be proportional and not excessive in relation to the concrete and direct military advantage anticipated. This principle is meant to limit excessive and unnecessary death and destruction. Fair treatment of prisoners of war Enemy soldiers who surrendered or who are captured no longer pose a threat. It is therefore wrong to torture them or otherwise mistreat them. No means malum in se Soldiers may not use weapons or other methods of warfare which are considered as evil, such as mass rape, forcing soldiers to fight against their own side or using weapons whose effects cannot be controlled (e.g. nuclear weapons). [ Examples ] The Catholic Church in the US never officially supported [the US intervention in?] both World War I and World War II [ January 2012 ]. In April 1917, two weeks after President Woodrow Wilson declared war on Germany, Cardinal James Gibbons of Baltimore, the de facto head of the U.S. Catholic church, issued a letter that all Catholics were to support the war. [ Ben Salmon and the Army of Peace http://ncronline.org/blogs/road-peace/ben-salmon-and-army-peace National Catholic Reporter John Dear February 23, 2010 ] As an example of the position US Catholic bishops took to the war against Germany, here is a quote from William Manning : [ Our Lord Jesus Christ does not stand for peace at any price...Every true American would rather see this land face war than see her flag lowered in dishonor...I wish to say that, not only from the standpoint of a citizen, but from the standpoint of a minister of religion...I believe there is nothing that would be of such great practical benefit to us as universal military training for the men of our land. ] [ A History of the Parish of Trinity Church in the City of New York: The rectorship of Dr. William Thomas Manning 1908 to 1921 C. T. Bridgeman 1962 256 ] [ Ending a war: Jus post bellum ] In recent years, some theorists, such as Gary Bass, Louis Iasiello and Brian Orend, have proposed a third category within Just War theory. Jus post bellum concerns justice after a war, including peace treaties, reconstruction, war crimes trials, and war reparations. Orend, for instance, proposes the following principles: Just cause for termination A state may terminate a war if there has been a reasonable vindication of the rights that were violated in the first place, and if the aggressor is willing to negotiate the terms of surrender. These terms of surrender include a formal apology, compensations, war crimes trials and perhaps rehabilitation. Alternatively, a state may end a war if it becomes clear that any just goals of the war cannot be reached at all or cannot be reached without using excessive force. Right intention A state must only terminate a war under the conditions agreed upon in the above criteria. Revenge is not permitted. The victor state must also be willing to apply the same level of objectivity and investigation into any war crimes its armed forces may have committed. Public declaration and authority The terms of peace must be made by a legitimate authority, and the terms must be accepted by a legitimate authority. Discrimination The victor state is to differentiate between political and military leaders, and combatants and civilians. Punitive measures are to be limited to those directly responsible for the conflict. Truth and reconciliation may sometimes be more important than punishing war crimes. Proportionality Any terms of surrender must be proportional to the rights that were initially violated. Draconian measures, absolutionist crusades and any attempt at denying the surrendered country the right to participate in the world community are not permitted. [ Alternative theories ] [ Staff of the Catholic Peace Fellowship 2007 The Life and Witness of Ben Salmon Sign of Peace 6.1 Spring 2007 http://www.catholicpeacefellowship.org/nextpage.asp?m%3D2524 ] Militarism – Militarism is the belief that war is not inherently bad but can be a beneficial aspect of society. Realism – The core proposition of realism is a skepticism as to whether moral concepts such as justice can be applied to the conduct of international affairs. Proponents of realism believe that moral concepts should never prescribe, nor circumscribe, a state&apos;s behaviour. Instead, a state should place an emphasis on state security and self-interest. One form of realism – descriptive realism – proposes that states cannot act morally, while another form – prescriptive realism – argues that the motivating factor for a state is self-interest. Just wars that violate Just Wars principles effectively constitute a branch of realism. Revolution and Civil War – Just War Theory states that a just war must have just authority. To the extent that this is interpreted as a legitimate government, this leaves little room for revolutionary war or civil war, in which an illegitimate entity may declare war for reasons that fit the remaining criteria of Just War Theory. This is less of a problem if the &quot; just authority &quot; is widely interpreted as &quot; the will of the people &quot; or similar. Article 3 of the 1949 Geneva Conventions side-steps this issue by stating that if one of the parties to a civil war is a High Contracting Party (in practice, the state recognised by the international community,) both Parties to the conflict are bound &quot; as a minimum, the following [humanitarian] provisions. &quot; Article 4 of the Third Geneva Convention also makes clear that the treatment of prisoners of war is binding on both parties even when captured soldiers have an &quot; allegiance to a government or an authority not recognized by the Detaining Power. &quot; Nonviolent struggle – The &quot; just war &quot; criterion of &quot; last resort &quot; requires believers to look for alternative means of conflict. The methods of nonviolent action permit the waging of political struggle without resort to violence. Historical evidence and political theory can be examined to determine whether nonviolent struggle can be expected to be effective in future conflicts. If nonviolent action is determined effective, then the requirements for &quot; just war &quot; are not met. Sharp, Gene, &quot; Beyond just war and pacifism: nonviolent struggle toward justice, freedom and peace &quot; Ecumenical Review, April, 1996. Absolutism – Absolutism holds that there are various ethical rules that are absolute. Breaking such moral rules is never legitimate and therefore is always unjustifiable. Pacifism – Pacifism is the belief that war of any kind is morally unacceptable and/or pragmatically not worth the cost. Pacifists extend humanitarian concern not just to enemy civilians but also to combatants, especially conscripts. Just War critics have included Ben Salmon, who was sentenced to death during World War I (later revised to 25 years hard labor) for desertion and spreading propaganda. Right of self-defence – The theory of self-defence based on rational self-interest maintains that the use of retaliatory force is justified against repressive nations that break the zero aggression principle. In addition, if a free country is itself subject to foreign aggression, it is morally imperative for that nation to defend itself and its citizens by whatever means necessary. Thus, any means to achieve a swift and complete victory over the enemy is imperative. This view is prominently held by Objectivists. &quot; &apos;Just War Theory&apos; &quot; vs. American Self-Defence, by Yaron Brook and Alex Epstein Consequentialism – The moral theory most frequently summarized in the words &quot; the end justifies the means, &quot; which tends to support the just war theory (unless the just war causes less beneficial means to become necessary, which further requires worst actions for self-defense with bad consequences). [ List of just war theorists ] Cicero (106 BC–43 BC) Ambrose (337/340–397) St. Augustine of Hippo (354–430) Gratian (Christian) (12th century) St. Thomas Aquinas (1225–1274) Stanislaw of Skarbimierz (1360–1431) Francisco de Vitoria (1492–1546) Francisco Suarez (1548–1617) Alberico Gentili (1552–1608) Hugo Grotius (1583–1645) Samuel Pufendorf (1632–1694) John Locke (1632–1704) Emerich de Vattel (1714–1767) Immanuel Kant (1724–1804) John Stuart Mill (1806–1873) Paul Tillich (1886–1965) George Barry O&apos;Toole (1886–1944) Reinhold Niebuhr (1892–1971) H. Richard Niebuhr (1894–1962) Paul Ramsey (1913–1988) John Rawls (1921–2002) Murray Rothbard (1926–1995) Michael Quinlan (1930-2009) Michael Novak (1933–) Michael Walzer (1935–) Ron Paul (1935–) Robert L. Holmes (193?–) Jean Bethke Elshtain (1941–) Oliver O&apos;Donovan (1945–) Louis Iasiello (1950–) George Weigel (1951–) Jeff McMahan (1954–) Brian Orend (1970–) [ References ] [ 30em ] [ Further reading ] [ 50 UCLA L. Rev. 721 2002-2003 By Any Means Necessary: Using Violence and Subversion to Change Unjust Law Butler, Paul http://heinonlinebackup.com/hol-cgi-bin/get_pdf.cgi?handle%3Dhein.journals%2Fuclalr50%26amp%3Bsection%3D40 ] Benson, Richard. The Just War Theory: A Traditional Catholic Moral View, The Tidings (2006). Showing the Catholic view in three points, including John Paul II &apos;s position concerning war. Blattberg, Charles. Taking War Seriously. A critique of just war theory. Brough, Michael W., John W. Lango, Harry van der Linden, eds., Rethinking the Just War Tradition (Albany, NY: SUNY Press, 2007). Discusses the contemporary relevance of just war theory. Offers an annotated bibliography of current writings on just war theory. Craig J. N. de Paulo, Augustinian Just War Theory and the Wars in Afghanistan and Iraq: Confessions, Contentions and the Lust for Power (Peter Lang, 2001) The most current and comprehensive breakdown of Augustine&apos;s influence on just war theory and an analysis the controversy among contemporary Roman Catholic thinkers. Dr Mark Evans, Just War Theory: A Reappraisal (Edinburgh University Press, 2005) Fotion, Nicholas. War and Ethics (London, New York: Continuum, 2007). ISBN 0-8264-9260-6. A defence of an updated form of just war theory. Heindel, Max. The Rosicrucian Philosophy in Questions and Answers - Volume II ( The Philosophy of War, World War I reference, ed. 1918), ISBN 0-911274-90-1 (Describing a philosophy of war and just war concepts from a Rosicrucian point of view) Khawaja, Irfan. Review of Larry May, War Crimes and Just War, in Democratiya 10, ( ), an extended critique of just war theory. MacDonald, David Roberts. Padre E. C. Crosse and &apos;the Devonshire Epitaph&apos;: The Astonishing Story of One Man at the Battle of the Somme (with Antecedents to Today&apos;s &apos;Just War&apos; Dialogue), 2007 Cloverdale Books, South Bend. ISBN 978-1-929569-45-8 Nájera, Luna. &quot; Myth and Prophecy in Juan Ginés de Sepúlveda’s Crusading &quot; Exhortación, &quot; in Bulletin for Spanish and Portuguese Historical Studies, 35:1 (2011). Discusses Sepúlveda&apos;s theories of war in relation to the war against the Ottoman Turks. O&apos;Donovan, Oliver. The Just War Revisited (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003). Ramsey, Paul. The Just War (New York: Scribners,1969). Steinhoff, Uwe. On the Ethics of War and Terrorism (Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2007). Covers the basics and some of the most controversial current debates. Walzer, Michael. Just and Unjust Wars : A Moral Argument with Historical Illustrations, 4th ed., (New York: Basic Books, 1977). ISBN 0-465-03707-0. Walzer, Michael. Arguing about War, (London: Yale University Press, 2004). ISBN 978-0-300-10978-8. v. Starck, Christian (Hrsg.): Kann es heute noch gerechte Kriege geben?, Wallstein-Verlag 2008 [ External links ] [ Just war theory ] Text of Cicero&apos;s Just War Theory in &apos;&apos;De Officiis&apos;&apos; Why Doesn&apos;t the Catholic Church Follow the Just War Docrtine? A Catholic Petition based on the Just War Doctrine Catholic Teaching Concerning a Just War at Catholicism.org Oregon State University Category:Articles with inconsistent citation formats Category:Applied ethics Category:Catholic social teaching Category:Catholic theology and doctrine Category:Concepts in ethics Category:Laws of war Category:Thomas Aquinas Category:Legal doctrines and principles Category:Christian terms Category:Christianity and violence ca:Guerra justa cy:Rhyfel cyfiawn de:Gerechter Krieg et:Õiglane sõda es:Guerra justa fa:نظریه جنگ مشروع fr:Doctrine de la guerre juste ko:정의로운 전쟁론 id:Doktrin tentang Perang yang Sah ja:正戦論 no:Rettferdig krig pl:Wojna sprawiedliwa pt:Doutrina da guerra justa ru:Справедливая война sh:Teorija pravednog rata fi:Oikeutettu sota tr:Adil savaş kuramı uk:Справедлива війна zh-yue:正義仗 zh:正義戰爭