[ 1927 12 13 ] { USA } [ 1980 03 25 1927 12 13 ] { Poet } { Poet } { Allen Ginsberg } James Arlington Wright (December 13, 1927 – March 25, 1980) was an American poet. Wright first emerged on the literary scene in 1956 with The Green Wall, a collection of formalist verse that was awarded the prestigious Yale Younger Poets Prize. But by the early 1960s, Wright, increasingly influenced by the Spanish language surrealists, had dropped fixed meters. His transformation achieved its maximum expression with the publication of the seminal The Branch Will Not Break (1963), which positioned Wright as curious counterpoint to the Beats and New York schools, which predominated on the American coasts. This transformation had not come by accident, as Wright had been working for years with his friend Robert Bly, collaborating on the translation of world poets in the influential magazine The Fifties (later The Sixties). Such influences fertilized Wright&apos;s unique perspective and helped put the Midwest back on the poetic map. Wright had discovered a terse, imagistic, free verse of clarity, and power. During the next ten years Wright would go on to pen some of the most beloved and frequently anthologized masterpieces of the century, such as &quot; A Blessing, &quot; &quot; Autumn Begins in Martins Ferry, Ohio, &quot; and &quot; I Am a Sioux Indian Brave, He Said to Me in Minneapolis. &quot; Technically, Wright was an innovator, especially in the use of his titles, first lines, and last lines, which he used to great dramatic effect in defense of the lives of the disenfranchised. He is equally well known for his tender depictions of the bleak landscapes of the post-industrial American Midwest. Since his death, Wright has developed a cult following, transforming him into a seminal writer of ever increasing influence. Each year, hundreds of writers gather to pay tribute at the James Wright Poetry Festival in Martins Ferry. Wright&apos;s son Franz Wright is also a poet. Together they are the only parent/child pair to have won a Pulitzer Prize in the same category (Poetry). [ Life ] [ Poetry ] Wright&apos;s early poetry is relatively conventional in form and meter, especially compared with his later, looser poetry. His work with translations of German and South American poets, as well as the influence of Robert Bly, had considerable influence on his own poems; this is most evident in The Branch Will Not Break, which departs radically from the formal style of Wright&apos;s previous book, Saint Judas. In addition to his own poetry, he also published loose translations of René Char &apos;s hermetic poems. His poetry often deals with the disenfranchised, or the outsider, American; yet it is also often inward probing. Wright suffered from depression and bipolar mood disorder s and also battled alcoholism his entire life. He experienced several nervous breakdown s, was hospitalized, and was subjected to electroshock therapy. His dark moods and focus on emotional suffering were part of his life and often the focus of his poetry, although given the emotional turmoil he experienced personally, his poems are often remarkably optimistic in expressing a faith in life and human transcendence. His seminal 1963 volume The Branch Will Not Break is one example of his belief in the human spirit. His 1972 Collected Poems was awarded the Pulitzer Prize. In addition to his other awards, Wright received a grant from the Rockefeller Foundation. [ Works ] [ Published in his lifetime ] Unless otherwise noted, year is when published: { Brunner, Edward, &quot; James Wright: Biographical Sketch &quot;, Modern American Poetry website, accessed April 19, 2008 } The Green Wall ( Yale University Press, 1957) Saint Judas ( Wesleyan University Press, 1959) The Branch Will Not Break (Wesleyan University Press, 1963) Autumn Begins in Martins Ferry, Ohio -- Broadside (1963) Shall We Gather at the River ( Wesleyan University Press, 1967) Collected Poems (Wesleyan University Press, 1971) Two Citizens ( Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1973) Moments of the Italian Summer ( Dryad Press, 1976) To a Blossoming Pear Tree ( Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1977) [ Published posthumously ] This Journey (1982; completed in 1980) The Temple at Nîmes (1982) James Wright, In Defense Against This Exile. Letters To Wayne Burns., edited with an introduction by John R. Doheny (1985) Above the River - the Complete Poems, introduction by Donald Hall (1992) Selected Poems (2005) A Wild Perfection: The Selected Letters of James Wright (2005) The Delicacy and Strength of Lace: Letters Between Leslie Marmon Silko and James Wright., edited by Anne Wright and Joy Harjo (2009) [ See also ] [ Poetry ] James Wright Poetry Festival Saundra Maley, Solitary Apprenticeship: James Wright and German Poetry (Lewiston, Maine: Edwin Mellen Press, 1996). [ Notes ] [ External links ] [ http://www.theparisreview.org/interviews/3839/the-art-of-poetry-no-19-james-wright The Paris Review James Wright, The Art of Poetry No. 19 Peter A. Stitt Summer 1975 ] Mr. James Wright reading a poem of his. Biography and critical commentary at Modern American Poetry from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. [ Wright, James American poet December 13, 1927 USA March 25, 1980 ] Category:American poets Category:Pulitzer Prize for Poetry winners Category:Writers from Ohio Category:Kenyon College alumni Category:Yale University alumni Category:University of Washington alumni Category:University of Minnesota faculty Category:Hunter College faculty Category:People from Belmont County, Ohio Category:People with bipolar disorder Category:1927 births Category:1980 deaths Category:Macalester College faculty pl:James Wright (poeta)