An anticoagulant is a substance that prevents coagulation (clotting) of blood. A group of pharmaceuticals called anticoagulants can be used in vivo as a medication for thrombotic disorders. Some anticoagulants are used in medical equipment, such as test tube s, blood transfusion bags, and renal dialysis equipment. [ As medications ] Anticoagulants reduce blood clotting. This prevents deep vein thrombosis, pulmonary embolism, myocardial infarction and stroke. [ Coumadins (Vitamin K antagonists) ] [ Vitamin K antagonist ] These oral anticoagulants are a class of pharmaceuticals that antagonize the effects of vitamin K 1. Examples include warfarin. It takes at least 48 to 72 hours for the anticoagulant effect to develop. Where an immediate effect is required, heparin must be given concomitantly. These anticoagulants are used to treat patients with deep-vein thrombosis (DVT), pulmonary embolism (PE), atrial fibrillation (AF), and mechanical prosthetic heart valve s. [ Adverse effects ] Patients aged 80 years or more may be especially susceptible to bleeding complications with a rate of 13 bleeds per 100 person-years. [ Hylek EM, Evans-Molina C, Shea C, Henault LE, Regan S Major hemorrhage and tolerability of warfarin in the first year of therapy among elderly patients with atrial fibrillation Circulation 115 21 2689–96 2007 17515465 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.653048 ] These oral anticoagulants are used widely as poisons for mammalian pests, especially rodents. (For details, see rodenticide and warfarin.) Depletion of vitamin K by coumadin therapy increases risk of arterial calcification and heart valve calcification, especially if too much vitamin D is present. { Adams J, Pepping J. &quot; Vitamin K in the treatment and prevention of osteoporosis and arterial calcification &quot;, Am J Health Sys Pharm, Aug 1, 2005, vol. 62, no. 15, pp. 1574-81. } [ Available agents ] [ Ron Winslow Avery Johnson Race Is on for the Next Blood Thinner http://online.wsj.com/article/SB119725064671318856.html Wall Street Journal A12 2007-12-10 2008-01-06...in a market now dominated by one of the oldest mainstay pills in medicine: the blood thinner warfarin. At least five next-generation blood thinners are in advanced testing to treat or prevent potentially debilitating or life-threatening blood clots in surgery and heart patients. First candidates could reach the market in 2009. ] Warfarin (Coumadin) This is the main agent used in the U.S. and UK Acenocoumarol and phenprocoumon This is used more commonly outside the U.S. and the UK Atromentin Brodifacoum Rat poison, not used medically Phenindione [ Heparin and derivative substances ] Heparin is a biological substance, usually made from pig intestines. It works by activating antithrombin III, which blocks thrombin from clotting blood. Heparin can be used in vivo (by injection), and also in vitro to prevent blood or plasma clotting in or on medical devices. Vacutainer brand test tubes containing heparin are usually colored green. [ Major pharmaceutical Heparin recall due to contamination ] In March 2008 major recalls of Heparin were announced by pharmaceuticals due to a suspected and unknown contamination of the raw Heparin stock imported from China. { New York Times, March 6, 2008, Drug Tied to China Had Contaminant, F.D.A. Says, retrieved 2008-03-07 } { New York Times, March 7, 2008, German Authorities Report Problems With Blood Thinner, retrieved 2008-03-07 } The contaminant was later found to be a non-naturally occurring compound called oversulfated chondroitin sulfate. { Blossom DB et al. Outbreak of adverse reactions associated with contaminated heparin. N Engl J Med. 2008 Dec 18;359(25):2674-84. } The U.S. Food and Drug Administration was quoted as stating that at least 19 deaths were believed linked to a raw Heparin ingredient imported from the People&apos;s Republic of China, and that they had also received 785 reports of serious injuries associated with the drug’s use. According to the New York Times: &apos;Problems with heparin reported to the agency include difficulty breathing, nausea, vomiting, excessive sweating and rapidly falling blood pressure that in some cases led to life-threatening shock&apos;. [ Low molecular weight heparin ] Low molecular weight heparin is a more highly processed product that is useful as it does not require monitoring of the APTT coagulation parameter (it has more predictable plasma levels) and has fewer side effects. [ Synthetic pentasaccharide inhibitors of factor Xa ] Fondaparinux is a synthetic sugar composed of the five sugars (pentasaccharide) in heparin that bind to antithrombin. It is a smaller molecule than low molecular weight heparin. Idraparinux [ Direct Factor Xa inhibitors ] [ Direct Xa inhibitor ] Drugs such as rivaroxaban and apixaban work by inhibiting Factor Xa directly (unlike the heparins and fondaparinux, which work via antithrombin activation). [ Direct thrombin inhibitors ] [ direct thrombin inhibitor ] Another type of anticoagulant is the direct thrombin inhibitor. [ Di Nisio M, Middeldorp S, Büller HR Direct thrombin inhibitors N. Engl. J. Med. 353 10 1028–40 2005 16148288 10.1056/NEJMra044440 ] Current members of this class include the bivalent drugs hirudin, lepirudin, and bivalirudin; and the monovalent drugs argatroban and dabigatran. An oral direct thrombin inhibitor, ximelagatran (Exanta) was denied approval by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in September 2004 and was pulled from the market entirely in February 2006 after reports of severe liver damage and heart attacks. In November 2010, dabigatran was approved by the FDA to treat atrial fibrillation. [ Other types of anticoagulants ] Many other anticoagulants exist, for use in research and development, diagnostics, or as drug candidates. Batroxobin, a toxin from a snake venom that clots platelet-rich plasma without affecting platelet s functions (lyses fibrinogen ). Hementin is an anticoagulant protease from the salivary glands of Haementeria ghilianii [ Food and herbal supplements ] Food supplements with blood thinning effect include nattokinase and lumbrokinase. [ May 2012 ] Many herbal supplements have blood thinning properties, such as danshen and feverfew. [ May 2012 ] [ General indications ] Therapeutic uses of anticoagulants include atrial fibrillation, pulmonary embolism (PE), deep vein thrombosis (DVT), or venous thromboembolism (VTE), congestive heart failure, stroke, myocardial infarction, genetic or acquired hypercoagulability [ Anticoagulants outside the body ] Laboratory instruments, blood transfusion bags, and medical and surgical equipment will get clogged up and become nonoperational if blood is allowed to clot. In addition, test tubes used for laboratory blood tests will have chemicals added to stop blood clotting. Apart from heparin, most of these chemicals work by binding calcium ions, preventing the coagulation proteins from using them. EDTA is denoted by mauve or purple caps on Vacutainer brand test tubes. This chemical strongly and irreversibly binds calcium. It is in a powdered form. Citrate is usually in blue Vacutainer tube. It is in liquid form in the tube and is used for coagulation tests, as well as in blood transfusion bags. It gets rid of the calcium, but not as strongly as EDTA. Correct proportion of this anticoagulant to blood is crucial because of the dilution. It can be in the form of sodium citrate or ACD. Oxalate has a mechanism similar to that of citrate. It is the anticoagulant used in fluoride (grey top) tubes. For the meaning of more test tube top colors, see Vacutainer#including coagulants. [ See also ] Anticoagulation in pregnancy Nitrophorin [ References ] [ 2 ] [ External links ] AgroMedic - Medicinal Leeches,Malaysia Leeches(Hirudinaria Manillensis) Staying Active and Healthy with Blood Thinners DVD by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality * ar:مضاد تخثر bs:Antikoagulans ca:Anticoagulant cs:Antikoagulans de:Antikoagulation es:Anticoagulante eu:Antikoagulatzaile fr:Anticoagulant it:Anticoagulante he:נוגד קרישה kk:Антикоагулянттар lt:Kraujo antikoaguliantas nl:Anticoagulans ja:抗凝固薬 nn:Antikoagulant nds:Antikoagulatschoon pl:Leki przeciwzakrzepowe pt:Anticoagulante ru:Антикоагулянты sr:Антикоагуланс fi:Antikoagulantti sv:Antikoagulantia tr:Antikoagülan uk:Антикоагулянти zh:抗凝剂