[ the pagan author and activist Starhawk (disambiguation) ] Starhawk (born Miriam Simos on June 17, 1951) is an American writer and activist. { Starhawk (2002). Webs of Power: Notes from the Global Uprising. New Society Publishers. } She is well known as a theorist of Paganism, and is one of the foremost popular voices of ecofeminism. She is a columnist for Beliefnet.com and for On Faith, the Newsweek / Washington Post online forum on religion. Starhawk&apos;s book The Spiral Dance (1979) was one of the main inspirations behind the Neopagan movement. In 2012, she was listed in Watkins &apos; Mind Body Spirit magazine as one of the 100 Most Spiritually Influential Living People. { http://www.watkinsbooks.com/review/watkins-spiritual-100-list-2012 } [ Early life and education ] Starhawk was born in 1951 in Saint Paul, Minnesota. Her father, Jack Simos, died when she was 5. Her mother, Bertha Claire Goldfarb Simos, was a professor of social work at UCLA. Both her parents were the children of Jewish immigrants from Russia. Starhawk received a BA in Fine Arts from UCLA. In 1973, while she was a graduate student in film at UCLA, she won the Samuel Goldwyn Writing Award for her novel, A Weight of Gold, a story about Venice, California, where she then lived. She received an MA in Psychology, with a concentration in feminist therapy, from Antioch University West in 1982. [ The Spiral Dance ] [ The Spiral Dance ] Following her years at UCLA, after a failed attempt to become a fiction writer in New York City, Starhawk returned to Califormia. She became active in the Neopagan community in the San Francisco Bay Area, and trained with Victor Anderson, founder of the Feri Tradition of witchcraft, and with Zsuzsanna Budapest, a feminist separatist involved in Dianic Wicca. She decided to try her hand at nonfiction, and wrote a book, The Spiral Dance, on Goddess religion, which she finished in 1977 but was unable to publish at first. Her luck changed when feminist religious scholar Carol P. Christ included an article on Witchcraft and the Goddess movement in the anthology Womanspirit Rising (1979). Christ put Starhawk in touch with an editor at Harper &amp; Row, who eventually published the book. The Spiral Dance: a Rebirth of the Ancient Religion of the Great Goddess was first published in 1979, and became a best-selling book about Neopagan belief and practice. A second edition was published in 1989 and a third edition in 1999. Since its publication, it has become a classic book on Wicca and modern witchcraft, spiritual feminism and the Goddess movement, and ecofeminism. The book has been translated into other languages, including German and Danish. The book was revised for 10th- and 20th-anniversary editions in 1989 and 1999, respectively. The original text of the book was left largely untouched. The revisions consist for the most part of introductions and notes reflecting on the origins of the book and the rituals it describes, and changes to the author&apos;s beliefs and practices since writing the book. Although commonly read as a book on Wicca, The Spiral Dance is distinguished by its visionary mysticism and ecstatic experience, and by its emphasis on women and the Goddess, although it also brings in the God, similar to most forms of Wicca. [ Projects ] Starhawk in a Sicilian workshop In 1979, partly to commemorate the publication of The Spiral Dance, Starhawk and her friends staged a public celebration of the Neopagan holiday of Samhain (Halloween) incorporating an actual spiral dance. This group became the Reclaiming Collective; the annual Spiral Dance ritual now draws hundreds of participants. Starhawk continues to work with Reclaiming, a tradition of Witchcraft that she co-founded. This now international organization offers classes, workshops, camps, and public rituals in earth-based spirituality, with the goal to &quot; unify spirit and politics &quot;. She also works internationally as a trainer in nonviolence and direct action, and as an activist within the peace movement, women&apos;s movement, environmental movement, and anti-globalization movement. She travels and teaches widely in North America, Europe and the Middle East, giving lectures and workshops. She was influential in the decision by the Unitarian Universalist Association of Congregations to include earth-centered traditions in the UUA sources of faith. She led numerous workshops for, and was an active member of CUUPS, The Covenant of Unitarian Universalist Pagans, Inc. (CUUPS) is an Interest Group of the Unitarian Universalist Association (UUA) honoring goddess-based, earth-centered, tribal and pagan spiritual paths. { http://www.cuups.org/content2/ May 18, 2008 } She is currently working with United for Peace and Justice, the RANT trainers&apos; collective, Earth Activist Training, and other groups. Starhawk has taught in several San Francisco Bay Area colleges and universities, including John F. Kennedy University, Antioch University West, the Institute of Culture and Creation Spirituality at Holy Names University, and Wisdom University. She is presently adjunct faculty at the California Institute of Integral Studies. [ Works ] Starhawk has written a number of books, and has also contributed works in other media. Her works have been translated into Spanish, French, German, Danish, Dutch, Italian, Portuguese, Polish, Czech, Greek, Japanese, and Burmese. [ Non-fiction ] The Spiral Dance: A Rebirth of the Ancient Religion of the Great Goddess (1979, 1989, 1999) Dreaming the Dark: Magic, Sex, and Politics (1982, 1988, 1997) Truth or Dare (1988) Webs of Power: Notes from the Global Uprising (2003) The Earth Path (2004) The Empowerment Manual: A Guide for Collaborative Groups (2011) [ As coauthor ] With M. Macha Nightmare and the Reclaiming Collective : The Pagan Book of Living and Dying] (1997) With Anne Hill and Diane Baker : Circle Round: Raising Children in the Goddess Tradition (1998) With Hilary Valentine: The Twelve Wild Swans: A Journey Into Magic, Healing and Action (2000) [ Fiction ] The Fifth Sacred Thing (1993) Walking to Mercury (1997) The Last Wild Witch (2009) [ Other media ] Starhawk has contributed to the films Signs Out of Time: The Story of Archaeologist Marija Gimbutas, Goddess Remembered, The Burning Times, and Full Circle. She participated in the Reclaiming CDs Chants: Ritual Music, and recorded the guided meditation Way to the Well.On YouTube: Starhawk speaks on spirituality and activism at UUA. She also wrote the call to action for the women&apos;s peace organization Code Pink. [ Personal life ] Starhawk married Edwin Rahsman in 1977. They subsequently divorced. She is currently married to David Miller, and they live in San Francisco. [ References ] Salomonsen, Jone (2002). Enchanted Feminism: The Reclaiming Witches of San Francisco. London and New York: Routledge. ISBN 0-415-22392-X Vale, V. and John Sulak (2001). Modern Pagans. ( Interview with Starhawk ). San Francisco: Re/Search Publications. ISBN 1-889307-10-6 [ Notes ] [ External links ] Starhawk – Official site Reclaiming Collective Earth Activist Training Starhawk&apos;s &apos;&apos;On Faith&apos;&apos; column Interview with Starhawk from Modern Pagans 2003 Interview on Spirituality and Activism [ Anarchism ] [ Starhawk June 17, 1951 ] Category:1951 births Category:Living people Category:People from Saint Paul, Minnesota Category:Anarcha-feminists Category:Green anarchists Category:American neopagans Category:American Wiccans Category:Ecofeminists Category:American occultists Category:American anarchists Category:American feminists Category:Jewish anarchists Category:Anarcho-pacifists Category:Jewish American writers Category:American feminist writers Category:Feminist spirituality Category:American columnists Category:Nonviolence advocates Category:Sustainability advocates Category:American anti–nuclear power activists Category:American Unitarian Universalists Category:Lambda Literary Award winners de:Starhawk es:Starhawk fr:Starhawk it:Starhawk ja:STARHAWK no:Starhawk pt:Starhawk fi:Starhawk sv:Starhawk