[ the life and times of Titus Livius information and sources relating to his History of Rome Ab Urbe Condita (book) ] [ Livy Titus Livius.png 180px Titus Livius (fictitious portrait) ca. 59 BC Padua ca. AD 17 Historian History History, biography, oratory Golden Age of Latin ] Titus Livius Patavinus (59 BC – AD 17) — known as Livy in English — was a Roman historian who wrote a monumental history of Rome and the Roman people. Ab Urbe Condita Libri, &quot; Books from the Foundation of the City, &quot; covering the period from the earliest legends of Rome well before the traditional foundation in 753 BC through the reign of Augustus in Livy&apos;s own time. He was on familiar terms with the Julio-Claudian family, advising Augustus&apos;s grandnephew, the future emperor Claudius, as a young man not long before 14 AD in a letter to take up the writing of history. { Foster (1874), p. xii, citing } { Suetonius, Claudius, xli. } Livy and Augustus&apos;s wife, Livia, were from the same clan in different locations, although not related by blood. [ Life ] Livy was born as Titus Livius in Patavium in northern Italy, now modern Padua. There is a debate about the year of Titus Livius&apos; birth, 64 BC or more likely 59 BC. At the time of Livy’s birth, his home city of Patavium was the second wealthiest city in the Italian peninsula. Patavium was a part of the province of Cisalpine Gaul at the time. In his works, Livy often expressed his deep affection and pride for Patavium, and the city was well known for its conservative values in morality and politics. { Livy, The Rise of Rome: Books 1-5, trans. T.J. Luce (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998), ix. } Livy’s teen years were during the 40s BC, a time that coincided with the civil wars that were occurring throughout the Roman world. The governor of Cisalpine Gaul at the time, a man called Asinius Pollio, had tried to bring Patavium into the camp of Marcus Antonius (Mark Antony), who was one of the three men in the fight for control over Rome. The wealthier citizens of Patavium refused to contribute money and arms to Asinius Pollio and went into hiding. Asinius Pollio then attempted to bribe the slaves of the wealthy citizens of Patavium to expose the whereabouts of their masters. Asinius Pollio&apos;s bribery did not work, and the citizens of Patavium pledged their allegiance to conservatism and the senate instead. Therefore, Livy and the other citizens of Patavium did not end up supporting Marcus Antonius in his campaign for control over Rome. It is likely, then, that the Roman civil wars prevented Livy from pursuing a higher education in Rome or going on a Grand Tour of Greece, which was common for adolescent males during the time. Later on, Asinius Pollio made a jibe at Livy&apos;s &quot; patavinity, &quot; saying that Livy&apos;s Latin showed certain &quot; provincialisms &quot; frowned on at Rome. His jibe at Livy and his &quot; patavinity &quot;, however, may have been said because of the fact that the city of Patavium had rejected Asinius Pollio, and he still harboured harsh feelings toward the city as a whole. { Livy, The Rise of Rome: Books 1-5, trans. T.J. Luce (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998), ix-x. } Titus Livius probably went to Rome in the 30s BC, and it is likely that he spent a large amount of time in the city after this, although it may not have been his primary home. During his time in Rome, he was never a senator nor held any other governmental position. His elementary mistakes in military matters show that he was never a soldier. However, he was educated in philosophy and rhetoric. It seems that Livy had the financial resources and means to live an independent life. He devoted a large part of his life to his writings, which he was able to do because of his financial freedom. { Livy, The Rise of Rome: Books 1-5, trans. T.J. Luce (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998), x. } Livy was known to give recitations to small audiences, but he was not heard of to engage in declamation, which was a common pastime. He was familiar with the emperor Augustus, formerly Octavian, and the imperial family. Octavian was one of the three men fighting for the control of Rome during the Civil Wars in the 40s BC. Octavian gained power after defeating Marcus Antonius and Cleopatra, and was later given the honorary name of Augustus. Considering Augustus came to be known as the greatest Roman Emperor in the eyes of the Romans, being a historian under Augustus was very beneficial to Livy’s career even after his death. It is said that Livy was the one who encouraged the future emperor Claudius, who was born in 10 BC, to explore the writing of history during his childhood. Livy himself was married and had at least one daughter and one son. Perhaps Livy’s most famous work was his history of Rome. In it he explains the complete history of the city of Rome, from its foundation to the death of Augustus. Because he was writing under the emperor Augustus, Livy’s history emphasizes the great triumphs of Rome. { Robert Payne, The Roman Triumph (London: Robert Hale Limited, 1962), 38. } He wrote his history with embellished accounts of Roman heroism in order to promote the new type of government implemented by Augustus when he became emperor. { Donald R. Dudley, The Romans: 850 BC – AD 337 (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1970), 19. } In Livy’s preface to his history, he said that he did not care whether his personal fame remained in darkness, as long as his work helped to “preserve the memory of the deeds of the world’s preeminent nation.” { Andrew Feldherr, Spectacle and Society in Livy’s History (London: University of California Press Ltd, 1998), ix. } Because Livy was writing about events that had occurred hundreds of years beforehand, the value of his history was questionable, although many Romans came to believe what he wrote to be the true history of Rome’s foundation. { Fritz Moritz Heichelheim, A History of the Roman People (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1962), 47. } He had also written other works, including an essay in the form of a letter to his son, and numerous dialogues, most likely using Cicero as a model. { Livy, The Rise of Rome: Books 1-5, trans. T.J. Luce (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998), xi. } Titus Livius is said to have died in the year AD 17 (three years after the death of the emperor Augustus) in his home city of Patavium. [ Works ] [ Ab Urbe Condita (book) ] { Musei Capitolini, } { Rome } Livy&apos;s only surviving work is the &quot; History of Rome &quot; (Ab Urbe Condita), which was his career from an age in middle life, probably 32, until he left Rome for Padua in old age, probably after the death of Augustus in the reign of Tiberius. When he began this work he was already past his youth; presumably, events in his life prior to that time had led to his intense activity as a historian. Seneca the Younger gives brief mention that he was also known as an orator and philosopher and had written some treatises in those fields from a historical point of view. [ Seneca the Younger Moral Letters to Lucilius Letter 41.9...for Livy wrote both dialogues (which should be ranked as history no less than as philosophy), and works which professedly deal with philosophy. ] [ Reception ] [ In Roman Empire ] Livy&apos;s History of Rome was in demand from the publication of the first packet. Livy became so famous that a man from Cadiz travelled to Rome just to see him, and once he had seen, returned home. { Pliny the Younger, Epistles, II.3. } The popularity of the work continued through the entire classical period. A number of Roman authors used Livy, including Aurelius Victor, Cassiodorus, Eutropius, Festus, Florus, Granius Licinianus and Orosius. Julius Obsequens used Livy, or a source with access to Livy, to compose his De Prodigiis, an account of supernatural events in Rome, from the consulship of Scipio and Laelius to that of Paulus Fabius and Quintus Aelius. Livy wrote during the reign of Augustus, who came to power after a civil war with generals and consuls claiming to be defending the Roman Republic, such as Pompey. Patavium had been pro-Pompey. To clarify his status, the victor of the civil war, Octavian Caesar, had wanted to take the title Romulus (the first king of Rome) but in the end accepted the senate proposal of Augustus. He did not abolish the republic de facto but adapted its institutions into the empire. Livy&apos;s enthusiasm for the republic is evident from the first pentade of his work, and yet the Julio-Claudian family (the imperial family) were as much fans of Livy as anyone. He could not have been an advocate of any sort of sedition in favor of restoring the Republic; he would have been put on trial for treason and executed, as many had been and would be. He must have been viewed as a harmless and relevant advocate of the ancient morality, which was a known public stance of the citizens of Patavium. His relationship to Augustus is defined primarily by a passage from Tacitus { Annales IV.34. } in which Cremutius Cordus is put on trial for his life for offenses no worse than Livy&apos;s and defends himself face-to-face with the frowning Tiberius as follows: &quot; I am said to have praised Brutus and Cassius, whose careers many have described and no one mentioned without eulogy. Titus Livius, pre-eminently famous for eloquence and truthfulness, extolled Cneius Pompeius in such a panegyric that Augustus called him Pompeianus, and yet this was no obstacle to their friendship. To avoid conviction, while waiting for a verdict Cordus committed suicide by self-starvation. His worst fears were realized in absentia: his books were sentenced to be burned by the aedile s, but they performed the task without zeal and many escaped. Livy&apos;s reasons for returning to Padua after the death of Augustus (if he did) are unclear, but the circumstances of Tiberius&apos; reign certainly allow for speculation. [ Later ] During the Middle Ages interest in Livy declined. { Foster (1874), p. xxiv. } Due to the length of the work the literate class were already reading summaries rather than the work itself, which was tedious to copy, expensive, and required a lot of storage space. It must have been during this period, if not before, that manuscripts began to be lost without replacement. The Renaissance was a time of intense revival; the population discovered that Livy was being lost and large amounts of money changed hands in the rush to collect Livy manuscripts. The poet Beccadelli sold a country home for the money to purchase one manuscript copied by Poggio. Petrarch and Pope Nicholas V launched a search for the now missing books. Laurentius Valla published an emended text initiating the field of Livy scholarship. Dante speaks highly of him in his poetry, and Francis I of France commissioned extensive artwork treating Livian themes; Niccolò Machiavelli &apos;s work on republic s, the Discourses on Livy is presented as a commentary on the History of Rome. Respect for Livy rose to lofty heights. After a few hundred years of Livy being studied by the youth of every Western population, moderns have developed their own views of Livy and his place in the ancient world, which were not current in ancient times. For example, one text on western civilization pronounces: &quot; Livy was the prose counterpart of Vergil &quot;, as both have been standard in the study of Golden Age Latin literature. [ A short history of Western civilization John Baugham Harrison Richard Eugene Sullivan 198 3 1971 Knopf 0-394-31057-8 ] Golden Age Latin was not known as such in classical times and the ancient reader could choose from a vastly larger bibliography; but in fact, private reading was a privilege of the literate few, who had the wealth to buy manuscripts or have them copied and had the time for library research. Public readings of works, however, were common and were the main way in which an author became known. [ Dates ] The authority supplying information from which possible vital data on Livy can be deduced is Eusebius of Caesaria, an early Christian-era bishop. One of his works was a summary of world history in ancient Greek, termed the Chronikon, dating from the early 4th century. This work was lost except for fragments (mainly excerpts), but not before it had been translated in whole and in part by various authors such as St. Jerome. The entire work survives in Armenian. St. Jerome wrote in Latin. Fragments in Syriac exist. { Fotheringham (1905), P. 1. } Eusebius&apos; work consists of two books, the Chronographia, a summary of history in annalist form, and the Chronikoi Kanones, tables of years and events. St. Jerome translated the tables into Latin as the Chronicon, probably adding some information of his own from unknown sources. Livy&apos;s dates appear in Jerome&apos;s Chronicon. The main problem with the information given in the MSS is that between them they often give different dates for the same events or different events, do not include the same material entirely and reformat what they do include. A date may be in Ab urbe condita or in Olympiad s or in some other form, such as age. These variations may have occurred through scribal error or scribal license. Some material has been inserted under the aegis of Eusebius. The topic of manuscript variants is a large and specialized one, on which authors of works on Livy seldom care to linger. As a result standard information in a standard rendition is used, which gives the impression of a standard set of dates for Livy. There are no such dates. A typical presumption is of a birth in the 2nd year of the 180th Olympiad and a death in the first year of the 199th Olympiad, which are coded 180.2 and 199.1 respectively. [ St. Jerome ( Hieronymus ): Chronological Tables - for Olympiads 170 to 203 [= 100 B.C. - 36 A.D.] http://www.attalus.org/translate/jerome2.html Attalus.org 14 August 2009 ] All sources use the same first Olympiad, 776/775-773/772 BC by the modern calendar. By a complex formula (made so by the 0 reference point not falling on the border of an Olympiad) these codes correspond to 59 BC for the birth, 17 AD for the death. In another manuscript the birth is in 180.4, or 57 BC. [ 1 Livy, Book 1 Titus Livius John Robert (Contributor) Seeley Oxford Clarendon Press 1881 0-86292-296-8 ] Jerome says that Livy was born the same year as Marcus Valerius Messala Corvinus and died the same year as Ovid. Messala, however, was born earlier, in 64 BC, and Ovid&apos;s death, usually taken to be the same year as Livy&apos;s, is more uncertain. As an alternative view, Ronald Syme argues for 64 BC-12 AD as a range for Livy, setting the death of Ovid at 12. { Kraus (1994), p.1, citing several articles by Syme. } A death date of 12, however, removes Livy from Augustus&apos; best years and makes him depart for Padua without the good reason of the second emperor, Tiberius, being not as tolerant of his republicanism. The contradiction remains. [ Notes ] [ 2 ] [ Bibliography ] [ B.O. Foster Livy Trollope Press 2008 1874 0-674-99256-3 ] [ Ab vrbe condita Book VI Livy Christina Shuttleworth Kraus (Editor) Cambridge University Press Cambridge 1994 0-521-41002-9 ] [ Additional reading ] [ Dorey T.A. Livy London &amp; Toronto Routledge &amp; K. Paul 1971 ] [ The Bodleian Manuscript of Jerome&apos;s Version of the Chronicles of Eusebius John Knight Fotheringham Oxford The Clarendon Press 1905 ] [ Simon Hornblower Simon Hornblower Antony Spawforth The Oxford Classical Dictionary 2003 Oxford University Press 978-0-19-860641-3 ] [ Kraus C. S. Woodman A. J. Latin Historians 2006 Oxford University Press 978-0-19-922293-3 ] [ 10.2307/310937 Syme Ronald Livy and Augustus Harvard Studies in Classical Philology 64 1959 27–87 310937 ] [ Roman Papers I E. Badian Oxford Oxford University Press 1979 400–454 ] [ Walsh P.G. Ch 5 Livy 115–142 Thomas Alan Dorey E.A. Thompson Latin Historians Studies in Latin Literature and its Influence London Routledge &amp; K. Paul 1966 ] Also in. [ External links ] [ Livy ] [ links to the surviving works of Livy in Latin and English Ab Urbe Condita (book) ] [ Jona Lendering Livy (1): Life http://www.livius.org/li-ln/livy/livy.htm Livius Articles on Ancient History 2006-2009 Livius.org 13 August 2009 ] [ Livy Padua ] Category:59 BC births Category:17 deaths Category:Golden Age Latin writers Category:People from Padua Category:Latin historians Category:1st-century BC historians Category:1st-century historians Category:1st-century BC Romans Category:1st-century Romans ar:تيتوس ليفيوس be-x-old:Тытус Лівіюс bg:Тит Ливий bs:Livije br:Titus Livius ca:Titus Livi cs:Livius cy:Titus Livius da:Livius de:Titus Livius el:Τίτος Λίβιος es:Tito Livio eo:Tito Livio ext:Titu Líviu eu:Tito Livio fa:تیتوس لیویوس fr:Tite-Live ga:Livias gd:Livius gl:Tito Livio ko:티투스 리비우스 hy:Տիտոս Լիվիոս hr:Livije id:Titus Livius is:Lívíus it:Tito Livio he:טיטוס ליוויוס ka:ტიტუს ლივიუსი la:Titus Livius lv:Tits Līvijs lt:Titas Livijus hu:Titus Livius mk:Тит Ливиј nl:Titus Livius ja:ティトゥス・リウィウス no:Titus Livius pl:Tytus Liwiusz pt:Tito Lívio ro:Titus Livius ru:Тит Ливий scn:Titu Liviu sk:Titus Livius sl:Tit Livij sr:Тит Ливије sh:Tit Livije fi:Livius sv:Titus Livius th:ลิวี tr:Titus Livius uk:Тит Лівій vec:Tito Livio vi:Titus Livius diq:Titus Livius zh:蒂托·李维