[ Records of the Grand Historian First page of the book in manuscript First page of the book in manuscript Sima Qian 史記 (Shǐjì) Han Dynasty China Classical Chinese Ancient Chinese history circa 91 BC ] [ 史記 史记 Shǐjì Shih-chi Si2 gei3 Sígei Sú-kì sy ci ] The Records of the Grand Historian, also known by its Chinese name Shiji ( [ 史記 Shǐjì Historical Records ] ), written from 109 to 91 BC, was the magnum opus of Sima Qian, in which he recounted Chinese history from the time of the Yellow Emperor until his own time. (The Yellow Emperor, traditionally dated around 2600 BC, is the first ruler whom Sima Qian considered sufficiently established as historical to appear in the Records.) [ Layout ] The 130 volumes (i.e. scrolls, now usually called &quot; chapters &quot; ) of the text classify information into several categories: 12 volumes of Benji (本紀) or &quot; Imperial Biographies &quot;, contain the biographies of all prominent rulers from the Yellow Emperor to Qin Shi Huang and the kings of Xia, Shang, and Zhou dynasties. The biographies of four emperors and one empress dowager of the Western Han Dynasty before his time are also included. In addition, though Xiang Yu never actually ruled all the country, his biography was contained in this class. 10 volumes of Biao (表) or &quot; Tables &quot;, are timelines of events. 8 volumes of Shu (書) or &quot; Treatises &quot;, of economics and other topics of the time. 30 volumes of Shijia (世家) or &quot; Biographies of the Feudal Houses and Eminent Persons &quot;, contain biographies of notable rulers, nobility and bureaucrats mostly from the Spring and Autumn and Warring States periods. 70 volumes of Liezhuan (列傳) or &quot; Biographies and Collective Biographies &quot;, contain biographies of important individual figures including Laozi, Mozi, Sun Tzu, and Jing Ke. [ Style ] Sima Qian Unlike subsequent official historical texts that adopted Confucian doctrine, proclaimed the divine rights of the emperors, and degraded any failed claimant to the throne, Sima Qian&apos;s more liberal and objective prose has been renowned and followed by poets and novelists. Most volumes of Liezhuan are vivid descriptions of events and persons. This has been attributed to the belief that the author critically used stories passed on from antiquity as part of his sources, balancing reliability and accuracy of the records. For instance, the material on Jing Ke &apos;s attempt at assassinating the first emperor of China was allegedly an eye-witness story passed on by the great-grandfather of his father&apos;s friend, who served as a low-ranking bureaucrat at court of Qin and happened to be attending the diplomatic ceremony for Jing Ke. It has been observed that the diplomatic Sima Qian has a way of accentuating the positive in his treatment of rulers in the Basic Annals, but slipping negative information into other chapters, and so his work must be read as a whole to obtain full information. There are also discrepancies of fact between various portions of the work, probably reflecting Sima Qian&apos;s use of different source texts. [ Source materials ] Sima&apos;s family were hereditary historians to the Han emperor. Sima Qian&apos;s father Sima Tan served as Grand Historian, and Sima Qian succeeded to his position. Thus he had access to the early Han dynasty archives, edicts, and records. Sima Qian was a methodical, skeptical historian who had access to ancient books, written on bamboo and wooden slips, from before the time of the Han Dynasty. Many of the sources he used did not survive. He not only used archives and imperial records, but also interviewed people and traveled around China to verify information. For example, he writes he &quot; heard &quot; that Xiang Yu and the ancient ruler Shun both had double pupils in one eye. In his first chapter, &quot; Annals of the Five Emperors, &quot; he writes, &quot; I went west as far as Mount Kong and Mount Dong [in Gansu ], north as far as Zhuolu [in Hebei ], east gradually to the sea, south to the Yangzi and the Huai. &quot; [ January 2012 ] In his 13th chapter, &quot; Genealogical Table of the Three Ages, &quot; Sima Qian writes, &quot; I have read all the genealogies of the kings (dieji 谍记) that exist since the time of the Yellow Emperor. &quot; In his 14th chapter, &quot; Yearly Chronicle of the Feudal Lords &quot;, he writes, &quot; I have read all the royal annals (chunqiu li pudie 春秋曆譜諜) up until the time of King Li of Zhou. &quot; The Grand Historian used The Annals of the Five Emperors (五帝系諜) and the Classic of History as source materials to make genealogies from the time of the Yellow Emperor until that of the Gonghe regency (841-2 BC). Sima Qian often cites his sources. For example, in the first chapter, &quot; Annals of the Five Emperors, &quot; he writes, &quot; I have read the Spring and Autumn Annals and the Guoyu. &quot; In his 15th chapter, &quot; Yearly Chronicle of the Six States, &quot; he writes, “I have read the Annals of Qin (qin ji 秦記), and they say that the Quanrong [a barbarian tribe] defeated King You of Zhou [ca 771 BC]. &quot; In his 18th chapter, Sima Qian writes, &quot; When I read the records of the distinguished followers of Gaozu who were enfeoffed as marquises, and observe the reasons for which their descendants were deprived of the fiefs of their fathers.... &quot; and later in the same chapter, &quot; I have set down only what is certain, and in doubtful cases left a blank. &quot; { Records of the Grand Historian, vol. Han Dynasty I, translated by } { Burton Watson (Columbia University, Revised Edition, 1993) } In the 19th chapter, he writes, &quot; I have occasion to read over the records of enfeoffment and come to the case of Wu Qian, the marquis of Bian.... &quot; (The father of Marquis Bian, Wu Rui, was named king (wang) of Changsha in Hunan for his loyalty to Gaozu. See article on Zhao Tuo ). In his chapter on the patriotic minister and poet Qu Yuan, Sima Qian writes, &quot; I have read [Qu Yuan&apos;s works] Li Sao, Tianwen ( &quot; Heaven Asking &quot; ), Zhaohun (summoning the soul), and Ai Ying ( Lament for Ying )”. In the 62nd chapter, &quot; Biography of Guan and of Yan &quot;, he writes, &quot; I have read Guan&apos;s Mu Min (牧民 - &quot; Government of the People &quot;, a chapter in the Guanzi ), Shan Gao ( &quot; The Mountains Are High &quot; ), Chengma ( chariot and horses; a long section on war and economics), Qingzhong (Light and Heavy; i.e. &quot; what is important &quot; ), and Jiufu (Nine Houses), as well as the Spring and Autumn Annals of Yanzi. &quot; In his 64th chapter, &quot; Biography of Sima Rangju &quot;, the Grand Historian writes, &quot; I have read Sima&apos;s Art of War. &quot; In the 121st chapter, &quot; Biographies of Scholars &quot;, he writes, &quot; I read the Imperial Decrees that encouraged education officials. &quot; [ Reliability ] [ May 2012 ] Joseph Needham wrote in 1954 that there were many scholars who doubted that Sima&apos;s Records of the Grand Historian contained accurate information about such distant history as the thirty kings of the Shang Dynasty (c. 1600 –c. 1050 BC). While some scholars argued that Sima could not possibly have had access to written materials which detailed history a millennium before his age, Needham has another conclusion. The discovery of oracle bones at an excavation of the Shang Dynasty capital at Anyang ( Yinxu ) matched twenty-three of the thirty Shang kings that Sima listed. [ May 2012 ] Needham writes that this remarkable archaeological find proves that Sima Qian &quot; did have fairly reliable materials at his disposal—a fact which underlines once more the deep historical-mindedness of the Chinese. &quot; { Needham, Joseph. (1972). Science and Civilization in China: Volume 1, Introductory Orientations. Richmond: Kingprint Ltd., reprinted by permission of the Cambridge University Press with first publication in 1954. ISBN 0-521-05799-X. Page 88, see: here. } [ Contents ] [ Annals ] Benji (本紀, annals), 12 volumes. Royal biographies in strict annalistic form that offer an overview of the most important events, especially from the time of the Zhou dynasty to that of the emperor of the Han dynasty. Number Title Translation Notes 1. 五帝本紀 Annals of the Five Emperors Traditional view of prehistoric China, beginning from the Yellow Emperor 2. 夏本紀 Annals of Xia Xia Dynasty 3. 殷本紀 Annals of Yin Shang (Yin) Dynasty 4. 周本紀 Annals of Zhou Zhou Dynasty 5. 秦本紀 Annals of Qin State of Qin 6. 秦始皇本紀 Annals of Qin Shi Huang Qin Dynasty 7. 項羽本紀 Annals of Xiang Yu 8. 高祖本紀 Annals of Gaozu Emperor Gaozu of Han, 206-195 BC 9. 呂太后本紀 Annals of Empress Dowager Lü Empress Lü Zhi (regent 195-180 BC) 10. 孝文本紀 Annals of the Xiaowen Emperor Emperor Wen of Han, 179-157 BC 11. 孝景本紀 Annals of the Xiaojing Emperor Emperor Jing of Han, 156-141 BC 12. 孝武本紀 Annals of the Xiaowu Emperor Emperor Wu of Han, 140-87 BC [ Tables ] Biao (表, tables), 10 tables: overview of the reigns of the successive lords of the feudal states from the time of the Zhou dynasty till that of the early Han. At the same time the most important events of their reigns are mentioned. Number Title Translation Notes 13. 三代世表 Genealogical Table of the Three Ages From the Yellow Emperor&apos;s time to the Xia, Shang, and Zhou dynasties 14. 十二諸侯年表 Yearly Chronicle of the Feudal Lords The lords who ruled the twelve feudal states in the Spring and Autumn Period 15. 六國年表 Yearly Chronicle of the Six States The six feudal states in the Warring States Period 16. 秦楚之際月表 Monthly Table of (the Events) between Qin and Chu The war between the feudal states of Qin and Chu 17. 漢興以來諸侯王年表 Yearly Table of the Nobles of the Imperial Clan since the Han Dynasty&apos;s Founding Nobles of the imperial family who held titles of nobility 18. 高祖功臣侯者年表 Yearly Table of the Officials who became Marquises in the Time of Gaozu Officials who received marquis titles in the time of Emperor Gaozu of Han 19. 惠景閒侯者年表 Yearly Table of the Officials who became Marquises between the Reigns of Emperor Hui and Emperor Jing Officials who received marquis titles from 194 to 141 BCE 20. 建元以來侯者年表 Yearly Table of the Officials who became Marquises since the Jianyuan Period Jianyuan was the reign period of Emperor Wu of Han from 140-135 BC 21. 建元已來王子侯者年表 Yearly Table of the Nobles&apos; Sons who became Marquises since the Jianyuan period 22. 漢興以來將相名臣年表 Yearly Table of Statesmen, Generals and Officials since the Han Dynasty&apos;s Founding [ Treatises ] Shu (書, treatises), 8 volumes. Each treatise describes an area of state interest. Number Title Translation Notes 23. 禮 Rites 24. 樂 Music 25. 律 Bells Harmony and measurements 26. 曆 Calendars 27. 天官 Astronomy 28. 封禪 Religious sacrificial ceremonies Sacrifices to Heaven and Earth 29. 河渠 Rivers and canals 30. 平準 Equalization Names of officials who had to buy crops in a year of bountiful harvest and sell in a year of crop failure [ Genealogies ] Shijia (世家, genealogies), 30 volumes. Descriptions in chronicle form of the events of the states from the time of the Zhou Dynasty until the early Han Dynasty and of eminent people. Number Title Translation Notes 31. 吳太伯世家 House of Wu Taibo State of Wu 32. 齊太公世家 House of Duke Tai of Qi State of Qi 33. 魯周公世家 House of Lu Zhougong State of Lu 34. 燕召公世家 House of Yan Shaogong State of Yan 35. 管蔡世家 Houses of Guan and Cai States of Cai and Cao 36. 陳杞世家 Houses of Chen and Qi 37. 衛康叔世家 House of Wei Kang Shu State of Wey 38. 宋微子世家 House of Song Wei Zi State of Song 39. 晉世家 House of Jin 40. 楚世家 House of Chu 41. 越王句踐世家 House of King Goujian of Yue State of Yue 42. 鄭世家 House of Zheng 43. 趙世家 House of Zhao 44. 魏世家 House of Wei 45. 韓世家 House of Han 46. 田敬仲完世家 House of Tian Jingzhong (Tian Wan) State of Qi under the House of Tian 47. 孔子世家 House of Confucius 48. 陳涉世家 House of Chen She 49. 外戚世家 Houses of the External Relatives The empresses and their families 50. 楚元王世家 House of Prince Yuan of Chu 51. 荊燕世家 Houses of Jing and Yan 52. 齊悼惠王世家 House of Prince Daohui of Qi Liu Fei 53. 蕭相國世家 House of Chancellor Xiao Xiao He 54. 曹相國世家 House of Chancellor Cao Cao Shen 55. 留侯世家 House of Marquis of Liu Zhang Liang 56. 陳丞相世家 House of Chancellor Chen Chen Ping 57. 絳侯周勃世家 House of Zhou Bo, Marquis of Jiang 58. 梁孝王世家 House of Prince Xiao of Liang 59. 五宗世家 House of the Five Clans The sons of Emperor Jing of Han 60. 三王世家 House of the Three Kings The rulers of Qi, Yan and Guangling [ Biographies ] Liezhuan (列傳, exemplary lives, often called biographies), 70 volumes. Biographies of important people. The biographies are limited to the description of the events that show the exemplary character of the subject, but in the Shiji is often supplemented with legends. One biography can treat two or more people if they are considered to belong to the same type. The last biographies describe the relations between the Chinese and the neighboring peoples. Number Title Translation Notes 61. 伯夷列傳 Biography of Bo Yi 62. 管晏列傳 Biographies of Guan and Yan Guan Zhong and Yan Ying (晏嬰) 63. 老子韓非列傳 Biographies of Laozi and Han Fei Includes the biographies of Zhuangzi and Shen Buhai 64. 司馬穰苴列傳 Biography of Sima Rangju 65. 孫子吳起列傳 Biographies of Sun Tzu and Wu Qi 66. 伍子胥列傳 Biography of Wu Zixu 67. 仲尼弟子列傳 Biographies of the disciples of Zhongni Zhongni is courtesy name of Confucius 68. 商君列傳 Biography of Lord Shang Shang Yang 69. 蘇秦列傳 Biography of Su Qin 70. 張儀列傳 Biography of Zhang Yi 71. 樗里子甘茂列傳 Biographies of Shu Lizi and Gan Mao Includes the biography of Gan Luo (甘羅) 72. 穰侯列傳 Biography of the Marquis of Rang Wei Ran (魏冉) 73. 白起王翦列傳 Biographies of Bai Qi and Wang Jian 74. 孟子荀卿列傳 Biographies of Mengzi and Xun Qing Mencius and Xunzi 75. 孟嘗君列傳 Biography of Lord Mengchang 76. 平原君虞卿列傳 Biographies of Lord Pingyuan and Yu Qing 77. 魏公子列傳 Biographies of the Sons of Duke Wei 78. 春申君列傳 Biography of Lord Chunshen 79. 范睢蔡澤列傳 Biographies of Fan Sui and Cai Ze 80. 樂毅列傳 Biography of Yue Yi 81. 廉頗藺相如列傳 Biographies of Lian Po and Lin Xiangru 82. 田單列傳 Biography of Tian Dan 83. 魯仲連鄒陽列傳 Biographies of Lu Zhonglian and Zou Yang 84. 屈原賈生列傳 Biographies of Qu Yuan and Master Jia Master Jia refers to Jia Yi 85. 呂不韋生列傳 Biography of Master Lü Buwei 86. 刺客列傳 Biographies of Assassins Cao Mo (曹沫), Zhuan Zhu, Yu Rang (豫讓), Nie Zheng (聶政) and Jing Ke 87. 李斯列傳 Biography of Li Si 88. 蒙恬列傳 Biography of Meng Tian 89. 張耳陳餘列傳 Biographies of Zhang Er and Chen Yu 90. 魏豹彭越列傳 Biographies of Wei Bao and Peng Yue 91. 黥布列傳 Biography of Qing Bu Ying Bu 92. 淮陰侯列傳 Biography of the Marquis of Huaiyin Han Xin 93. 韓信盧綰列傳 Biographies of Hán Xin (King of Hán) and Lu Wan Includes the biography of Chen Xi (陳豨) 94. 田儋列傳 Biography of Tian Dan 95. 樊酈滕灌列傳 Biographies of Fan, Li, Teng and Guan Fan Kuai, Li Shang (酈商), Xiahou Ying, Guan Ying (灌嬰) 96. 張丞相列傳 Biography of Chancellor Zhang Zhang Cang (張蒼) 97. 酈生陸賈列傳 Biographies of Li Yiji and Lu Gu Includes the biography of Zhu Jian (朱建) 98. 傅靳蒯成列傳 Biographies of Fu, Jin, and the Marquis of Kuaicheng Fu Kuan (寬), Jin She (歙) and Zhou Xue (周譄) 99. 劉敬叔孫通列傳 Biographies of Liu Jing and Shusun Tong 100. 季布欒布列傳 Biographies of Ji Bu and Luan Bu 101. 袁盎晁錯列傳 Biographies of Yuan Ang and Chao Cuo 102. 張釋之馮唐列傳 Biographies of Zhang Shizhi and Feng Tang 103. 萬石張叔列傳 Biographies of Wan Shi and Zhang Shu 104. 田叔列傳 Biography of Tian Shu 105. 扁鵲倉公列傳 Biographies of Bian Que and the Duke of Cang Duke of Cang refers to Tai Cang (太倉) 106. 吳王濞列傳 Biographies of Pi, the Prince of Wu Liu Pi 107. 魏其武安侯列 Biographies of the Marquis of Weiqi and the Marquis of Wu&apos;an Dou Ying (竇嬰) and Tian Fen (田蚡) 108. 韓長孺列傳 Biography of Han Changru 109. 李將軍列傳 Biography of General Li Li Guang 110. 匈奴列傳 Treatise on the Xiongnu 111. 衛將軍驃騎列傳 Biography of Cavalry General Wei Wei Qing 112. 平津侯主父列傳 Biographies of the Marquis of Pingjin and Zhufu Gongsun Hong (公孫弘) and Zhufu Yan (主父偃) 113. 南越列傳 Treatise on the Nanyue 114. 東越列傳 Treatise on the Eastern Yue 115. 朝鮮列傳 Treatise on Chosun Korea 116. 西南夷列傳 Treatise on the Southwestern Yi people 117. 司馬相如列傳 Biography of Sima Xiangru 118. 淮南衡山列傳 Biographies of Huainan and Hengshan The kings of Huainan and Hengshan 119. 循吏列傳 Biographies of Upright Officials Sunshu Ao, Zi Chan, Gong Yixiu (公儀休), Shi She (石奢) and Li Li (李離) 120. 汲鄭列傳 Biographies of Ji and Zheng Ji An (汲黯) and Zheng Dangshi (鄭當時) 121. 儒林列傳 Biographies of Confucian Scholars Gongsun Hong (公孫弘), Shen Gong (申公), Yuan Gu (轅固), Han Ying (韓嬰), Fu Sheng (伏勝), Dong Zhongshu and Hu Wu (胡毋) 122. 酷吏列傳 Biographies of Cruel Officials Hou Feng (侯封), Zhi Du (郅都), Ning Cheng, Zhou Yangyou (周陽由), Zhao Yu (趙禹), Zhang Tang, Yi Zong (義縱), Wang Wenshu (王溫舒), Yin Qi (尹齊), Yang Pu (楊僕), Jian Xuan (減宣)and Du Zhou (杜周) 123. 大宛列傳 Treatise on the Dayuan 124. 游俠列傳 Biographies of Knight-errants Lu Zhujia (魯朱家) and Guo Jie (郭解) 125. 佞幸列傳 Biographies of Flatterers 126. 滑稽列傳 Biographies of Jesters Chunyu Kun, You Meng (優孟), You Zhan (優旃) and Dongfang Shuo ) 127. 日者列傳 Biographies of Soothsayers 128. 龜策列傳 Biographies of Diviners 129. 貨殖列傳 Biographies of Usurers People who enriched themselves [ Afterword ] The last important section features an afterword that includes an autobiography by Sima Qian. He explains in it why and under what circumstances he wrote the Shiji. Number Title Translation Notes 130. 太史公自序 Autobiographical Afterword of the Grand Historian [ Transmission and supplementation by other writers ] After the completion of the Shiji in ca. 91 BCE, the nearly completed manuscript was hidden in the residence of the daughter of Sima Qian, Sima Ying (司馬英), to avoid destruction under Emperor Wu and his immediate successor Emperor Zhao. The Shiji was finally disseminated during the reign of Emperor Xuan by Sima Qian&apos;s grandson (through his daughter), Yang Yun (杨惲), after a hiatus of around twenty years. The changes in the manuscript of the Shiji during this hiatus have always been disputed among scholars. That the text was more or less complete by ca. 91 BCE is established in the Letter to Ren&apos;an, in which Sima Qian gives the precise number of chapters for each section of his work. After his death (presumably only a few years later), few people had the opportunity to see the whole work. However, various additions were still made to it. The historian Liu Zhiji (劉知幾, 661-721) reported the names of a total of fifteen scholars supposed to have added material to the Shiji during the period after the death of Sima Qian. Only the additions by Chu Shaosun (褚少孫, c.105 - c.30 BCE) are clearly indicated by adding &quot; Mr Chu said, &quot; (Chu xiansheng yue, 褚先生曰). Already in the first century AD, Ban Biao and Ban Gu claimed that ten chapters in Records of the Grand Historian were lacking. A large number of chapters dealing with the first century of the Han Dynasty (i.e. the 2nd century BCE) correspond exactly to the relevant chapters from Hanshu. It is unclear whether those chapters initially came from the Shiji or from the Hanshu. Researchers Yves Hervouet (1921-1999) and Anthony Hulsewé (1910-1993) assumed that the lost original parts of the Shiji were supplemented with those from the Hanshu. [ Editions ] The earliest extant copy of Records of the Grand Historian, handwritten, was made during the Southern and Northern Dynasties period (420 – 589 AD). The earliest printed edition, called Shiji jijie (史記集解, literally Records of the Grand Historian, Collected Annotations), was published during the Northern Song Dynasty. Huang Shanfu &apos;s edition, printed under the Southern Song dynasty, is the earliest collection of the Sanjiazhu commentaries on Records of the Grand Historian (三家注, literally: The Combined Annotations of the Three Experts). In modern times, the Zhonghua Book Company (simp. 中华书局 trad. 中華書局) in Beijing has published the book in both simplified Chinese and traditional Chinese editions. The 1959 (2nd ed., 1982) Sanjiazhu edition (based upon the Jinling Publishing House edition, vide infra) contains commentaries interspersed among the main text and is considered to be an authoritative modern edition. The most well known editions of the Shiji are: Year Publisher Printing technique Notes Southern Song Dynasty (1127 – 1279) Shan-fu Block-printed Abbreviated as the Huang Shanfu edition (黄善夫本) Ming Dynasty, between the times of the Jiajing and Wanli Emperors (between 1521 and 1620) The Northern and Southern Imperial Academy Block-printed published in 21 Shi. Abbreviated as the Jian edition (监本) Ming Dynasty Publisher: the bibliophile Mao Jin (毛晋), 1599 – 1659) and his studio Ji Gu Ge (汲古閣 or the Drawing from Ancient Times Studio) Block-printed Published in 17 Shi. Abbreviated as the Mao Ke edition (毛刻本) or the Ji Gu Ge edition (汲古閣本) Qing Dynasty, in the time of the Qianlong Emperor (1711 – 1799) Wu Yingdian Block-printed Published in the Twenty-Four Histories, abbreviated as the Wu Yingdian edition (武英殿本) Qing Dynasty, in the time of the Tongzhi Emperor (1856 – 1875) Jinling Publishing House (in Nanjing ) Block-printed Proofreading and copy editing done by Zhang Wenhu. Published with the Sanjiazhu commentaries, 130 volumes in total. Abbreviated as the Jinling Ju or Jinling Publishing edition (金陵局本) [ Annotations and commentaries ] The best known annotations are Shiji Jijie,Shiji Suoyin and Shiji Zhengyi. Huang Shanfu combined the three, which make up The Combined Annotations of the Three Experts. After the Shanfu edition, Sanjiazhu became mandatory for students of shiji and ancient Chinese history. During the Qing Dynasty, Liang Yusheng authored shiji Zhi yi ( &quot; records doubts on shiji &quot; ). In modern times, Japanese scholar Takigawa Kametaro published a book called 史记会注考证,. [ &lt; link &gt; &lt; wikilink href= &quot; Liu Song Dynasty &quot; &gt; Liu Song Dynasty &lt; /wikilink &gt; &lt; /link &gt; ] Pei Yin (裴骃) Shiji Jijie (史记集解) [ &lt; link &gt; &lt; wikilink href= &quot; Tang Dynasty &quot; &gt; Tang Dynasty &lt; /wikilink &gt; &lt; /link &gt; ] Sima Zhen (司马贞) Shiji Suoyin (史记索隐) Zhang Shoujie (张守节) Shiji Zhengyi (史記正義) [ See also ] Twenty-Four Histories [ References ] [ Further reading ] Hulsewé A.F.P. (1993), “Shih chi”, Early Chinese Texts: a bibliographical guide (editor —Loewe M.) p.  405-414 (Berkeley: Society for the Study of Early China). Sima Qian (1993), Records of the Grand Historian of China. Qin Dynasty. Translated by Burton Watson (Hong Kong: The Research Centre for Translation [The Chinese University of Hong Kong]; New York, Columbia University Press). ISBN 0-231-08168-5 (hbk); ISBN 0-231-08169-3 (pbk) Sima Qian (1993), Records of the Grand Historian of China. Han Dynasty II. (Revised Edition). Translated by Burton Watson (New York, Columbia University Press). ISBN 0-231-08168-5 (hbk); ISBN 0-231-08167-7 (pbk) Ssu-ma Ch&apos;ien (1961), Records of the grand historian of China: Han Dynasty I, Translated from the Shih chi of Ssu-ma Ch&apos;ien by Burton Watson (Hong Kong: The Research Centre for Translation [The Chinese University of Hong Kong]; New York: Columbia University Press). Revised Edition (1993): ISBN 0-231-08165-0 (pbk), 0-231-08164-2. Ssu ma Ch’ien (1994), The Grand Scribe’s Records I: the basic annals of pre-Han China (editor —Nienhauser W.H. Jr.) (Bloomington: Indiana University Press). (An annotated translation.) Ssu ma Ch’ien (1994), The Grand Scribe’s Records VII: the memoirs of pre-Han China (editor —Nienhauser W.H. Jr.) (Bloomington: Indiana University Press). (An annotated translation.) Ssu ma Ch’ien (2002), The Grand Scribe’s Records II: the basic annals of pre-Han China (editor —Nienhauser W.H. Jr.) (Bloomington: Indiana University Press). (An annotated translation.) Ssu ma Ch’ien (2006), The Grand Scribe’s Records V.1: the hereditary houses of pre-Han China (editor —Nienhauser W.H. Jr.) (Bloomington: Indiana University Press). (An annotated translation.) Ssu ma Ch’ien (2008), The Grand Scribe’s Records VIII: the memoirs of Han China (editor —Nienhauser W.H. Jr.) (Bloomington: Indiana University Press). (An annotated translation.) [ External links ] [ zh 史記 Records of the Grand Historian (in Chinese) ] &apos;&apos;Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain &amp; Ireland&apos;&apos;, 1894, Article X, pp. 269–295. &apos;&apos;Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain &amp; Ireland&apos;&apos;, 1895, Article III, pp. 93–109, and Article XVII, pp. 601–614. and part of chapter 63, from The Sacred Books and Early Literature of the East, Volume XII: Medieval China, ed. Charles F. Horne, 1917, pp. 396–398. Another copy of Allen&apos;s translations of chapters 1–3 Category:Han Dynasty texts Category:Han Dynasty literature Category:2nd-century BC history books Category:1st-century BC history books Category:Chinese history texts Category:Historiography of China bg:Записки на великия историк ca:Registres del Gran Historiador cv:Ши цзи cs:Zápisky historika de:Shiji es:Memorias históricas fa:شیجی fr:Shiji ko:사기 (역사서) hi:महान इतिहासकार के अभिलेख id:Catatan Sejarah Agung it:Shi Ji he:רשומות ההיסטוריון ky:Ши-цзи hu:A történetíró feljegyzései nl:Shiji ja:史記 no:Shiji pl:Zapiski historyka pt:Registros do Historiador ru:Ши цзи simple:Records of the Grand Historian sh:Zapisi Velikog Historičara sv:Shiji ta:மதிப்புக்குரிய வரலாற்றாளரின் ஆவணப் பதிவுகள் tr:Shiji vi:Sử ký Tư Mã Thiên zh-classical:史記 zh:史记