[ Western Philosophers 20th-century philosophy #B0C4DE 200px Eric Voegelin Eric Voegelin January 3, 1901 Cologne, Germany January 19, 1985 Stanford, California, USA Western Philosophy History, Consciousness, Religion, Political Science Plato, Aristotle, Augustine, Thomas Aquinas, Church Fathers, Alfred North Whitehead, Karl Kraus, Ernst Cassirer, Karl Jaspers, Hans Urs von Balthasar, Henri de Lubac, Hans Jonas, William James, Ludwig von Mises, Hans-Georg Gadamer, John Fortescue, Giambattista Vico, George Santayana, Paul Valéry, Jean Bodin, Leo Strauss Russell Kirk, William F. Buckley, Jr., Leo Strauss, Charles R. Embry, Gerhard Niemeyer, David Walsh, Ellis Sandoz, Mendo Castro Henriques, Olavo de Carvalho ] Eric Voegelin, born Erich Hermann Wilhelm Vögelin, (January 3, 1901 – January 19, 1985) was a German -born American political philosopher. He was born in Cologne, then Imperial Germany, and educated in political science at the University of Vienna. He became a teacher and then an associate professor of political science at the Faculty of Law. In 1938 he, with his wife, fled from the Nazi forces which had recently entered Vienna, emigrating to the United States, where they became citizens in 1944. He spent most of his academic career at the University of Notre Dame, Louisiana State University, the University of Munich and the Hoover Institution of Stanford University. [ Biography ] Voegelin was born in Cologne in 1901. He taught political theory and sociology at the University of Vienna after his habilitation there in 1928. While in Austria Voegelin established the beginnings of his long lasting friendship with F. A. Hayek. { Federici, Michael. Eric Voegelin: The Restoration of Order, ISI Books, 2002, p. 1 } In 1933 he published two books criticizing Nazi racism, and was forced to flee from Austria following the Anschluss in 1938. After a brief stay in Switzerland, he arrived in the United States and taught at a series of universities before joining Louisiana State University &apos;s Department of Government in 1942. His advisers on his dissertation were Hans Kelsen and Othmar Spann. Voegelin remained in Baton Rouge until 1958 when he accepted an offer by Munich &apos;s Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität to fill Max Weber &apos;s former chair in political science, which had been empty since Weber&apos;s death in 1920. In Munich he founded the Institut für Politische Wissenschaft. Voegelin returned to America in 1969 to join Stanford University &apos;s Hoover Institution on War, Revolution, and Peace as Henry Salvatori Fellow where he continued his work until his death on January 19, 1985. He was a member of the Philadelphia Society. { http://phillysoc.org/DistinguishedMembers.pdf } [ Work ] Voegelin worked throughout his life to account for the endemic political violence of the twentieth century in an effort variously referred to as a philosophy of politics, history, or consciousness. Voegelin published scores of books, essays, and reviews in his lifetime. An early work was Die politischen Religionen (1938), (The Political Religions), on totalitarian ideologies and their structural similarities to religion. His magnum opus is the multi-volume (English-language) Order and History, which began publication in 1956 and remained incomplete at the time of his death 29 years later. His 1951 Charles Walgreen lectures, published as The New Science of Politics, is generally seen as a prolegomenon to this, and remains his best known work. He left many manuscripts unpublished, including a history of political ideas that has since been published in eight volumes. Order and History was originally conceived as a six-volume examination of the history of order occasioned by Voegelin&apos;s personal experience of the disorder of his time. The first three volumes, Israel and Revelation, The World of the Polis, and Plato and Aristotle, appeared in rapid succession in 1956 and 1957 and focused on the evocations of order in the ancient Near East and Greece. Voegelin then encountered difficulties that slowed the publication down. This, combined with his university administrative duties and work related to the new institute, meant that seventeen years separated the fourth from the third volume. His new concerns were indicated in the 1966 German collection Anamnesis: Zur Theorie der Geschichte und Politik, and the fourth volume, The Ecumenic Age, appeared in 1974. It broke with the chronological pattern of the previous volumes by investigating symbolizations of order ranging in time from the Sumerian King List to Hegel. Continuing work on the final volume, In Search of Order, occupied Voegelin&apos;s final days and it was published posthumously in 1987. [ October 2007 ] One of Voegelin&apos;s main points in his later work is that a sense of order is conveyed by the experience of transcendence. This transcendence can never be fully defined nor described, though it may be conveyed in symbols. A particular sense of transcendent order serves as a basis for a particular political order. It is in this way that a philosophy of politics becomes a philosophy of consciousness. Insights may become fossilised as dogma. The main aim of the political philosopher is to remain open to the truth of order, and convey this to others. Voegelin is more interested in the ontological issues that arise from these experiences than the epistemological questions of how we know that a vision of order is true or not. For Voegelin, the essence of truth is trust. All philosophy begins with experience of the divine. Since God is experienced as good, one can be confident that reality is knowable. As Descartes would say, God is not a deceiver. Voegelin&apos;s work does not fit in any standard classifications, although some of his readers have found similarities in it to contemporaneous works by, for example, Ernst Cassirer, Ludwig Wittgenstein, Martin Heidegger, and Hans-Georg Gadamer. He has a sometimes unapproachable style and a heavy reliance upon extensive background knowledge. Voegelin often invents terms or uses old ones in new ways. However, there are patterns in his work with which the reader can quickly become familiar. Among indications of growing engagement with Voegelin&apos;s work are the 305 page international bibliography published in 2000 by Munich&apos;s Wilhelm Fink Verlag; the presence of dedicated research centers at universities in the United States, Germany, Italy, and the United Kingdom; the appearance of recent translations in languages ranging from Portuguese to Japanese; and the publishing of the nearly complete 34 volume collection of his primary works by the University of Missouri Press and various primary and secondary works offered by the Eric-Voegelin-Archiv of Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität. [ Voegelin on Gnosticism ] In his The New Science of Politics, Order and History, and Science, Politics and Gnosticism, Voegelin opposed what he believed to be unsound Gnostic influences in politics. He defined gnosis as &quot; a purported direct, immediate apprehension or vision of truth without the need for critical reflection; the special gift of a spiritual and cognitive elite. &quot; { &quot; According to Voegelin, the claim to gnosis may take intellectual, emotional, and volitional forms. &quot; [Webb 1981:282] Glossary of Voegelin terms online } Gnosticism is a &quot; type of thinking that claims absolute cognitive mastery of reality. Relying as it does on a claim to gnosis, gnosticism considers its knowledge not subject to criticism. Gnosticism may take transcendentalizing (as in the case of the Gnostic movement of late antiquity) or immanentizing forms (as in the case of Marxism). &quot; { of Voegelin terms online [Webb 1981:282] } Apart from the Classical Christian writers against heresy, his sources on Gnosticism were secondary, since the texts in the Nag Hammadi library were not yet widely available. For example Voegelin uses Hans Urs von Balthasar, Henri de Lubac, and the Jewish German philosopher Hans Jonas. { Voegelin, Eric, } { Ellis Sandoz, Gilbert Weiss, and } { William Petropulos. The Collected Works of Eric Voegelin, Louisiana State University Press, 1989. ISBN 0-8071-1826-5 } Voegelin perceived similarities between ancient Gnosticism and modernist political theories, particularly communism and nazism. He identified the root of the Gnostic impulse as alienation, that is, a sense of disconnection from society and a belief that this lack is the result of the inherent disorder, or even evil, of the world. This alienation has two effects: The first is the belief that the disorder of the world can be transcended by extraordinary insight, learning, or knowledge, called a Gnostic Speculation by Voegelin (the Gnostics themselves referred to this as gnosis ). The second is the desire to implement and or create a policy to actualize the speculation, or Immanentize the Eschaton, i.e., to create a sort of heaven on earth within history. According to Voegelin the Gnostics are really rejecting the Christian eschaton of the kingdom of God and replacing it with a human form of salvation through esoteric ritual or practice. The primary feature that characterizes a tendency as gnostic for Voegelin is that it is motivated by the notion that the world and humanity can be fundamentally transformed and perfected through the intervention of a chosen group of people (an elite), a man-god, or men-Gods, Übermensch, who are the chosen ones that possess a kind of special knowledge (like magic or science) about how to perfect human existence. This stands in contrast to a notion of redemption that is achieved through the reconciliation of mankind with the divine. Marxism therefore qualifies as &quot; gnostic &quot; because it purports that we can establish the perfect society on earth once capitalism has been overthrown by the &quot; proletariat. &quot; Likewise, Nazism is seen as &quot; gnostic &quot; because it posits that we can achieve utopia by attaining racial purity, once the master race has freed itself of the racially inferior and the degenerate. In the two cases specifically analyzed by Voegelin, the totalitarian impulse is derived from the alienation of the individuals from the rest of society. This leads to a desire to dominate (libido dominandi) which has its roots not just in the Gnostic&apos;s conviction of the imperative of his vision but also in his lack of concord with a large body of his society. As a result, there is very little regard for the welfare of those who are harmed by the resulting politics, which ranges from coercive to calamitous (e.g. the Russian proverb: &quot; You have to crack a few eggs to make an omelet &quot; ). [ Immanentizing the eschaton ] [ Immanentize the eschaton ] One of his most quoted passages (by such figures as William F. Buckley, Jr. { Buckley, Jr., William F. Cancel Your Own Goddam Subscription: Notes &amp; Asides from National Review, Basic Books, 2007, pp. 23-24 (http://www.scribd.com/doc/62797891/Cancel-Your-Own-Goddam-Subscription-Notes-and-Asides-From-National-Review accessed on 1/31/2012) } ) is the following: The problem of an eidos in history, hence, arises only when a Christian transcendental fulfillment becomes immanentized. Such an immanentist hypostasis of the eschaton, however, is a theoretical fallacy. { Voegelin, Eric (1987). The New Science of Politics, p. 120. } From this comes the catchphrase : &quot; Don&apos;t immanentize the eschaton! &quot; which simply means: &quot; Do not try to make that which belongs to the afterlife happen here and now. &quot; or &quot; Don&apos;t try to create heaven on earth. &quot; When Voegelin uses the term gnosis negatively, it is to reflect the word as found in the Manichaeism and Valentinianism of antiquity. As it is later then immanentized (or manifest) in modernity in the wake of Joachim of Fiore and in the various ideological movements outlined in his works. { voegelin, New Science Of Politics, chap. 4 } Voegelin also builds on the term gnosticism as it is defined by Hans Jonas in his The Gnostic Religion in reference to Heidegger &apos;s gnosticism. Which is to have an understanding and control over reality that makes Mankind as powerful as the role of God in reality. Voegelin was arguing from a Hellenistic position that good gnosis is derived from pistis (faith) and that the pagan tradition made a false distinction between faith and noesis. Furthermore, this dualist perspective was the very essence of gnosticism via the misuse of Noema and caused a destructive division between the internal and external world in human consciousness. To reconcile the internal ( subjective ) and external ( objective ) world of consciousness was the restoration of order. { Eric Voegelin, THE ECUMENIC AGE, ORDER &amp; HISTORY, vol. 4, esp. introduction &amp; chap. 5, } { COLLECTED WORKS OF ERIC VOEGELIN, vol. 17, ed. Michael Franz (University of Missouri Press, 2000) } [ Social alienation ] Voegelin identified the root of the Gnostic impulse as alienation, that is, a sense of disconnection with society, and a belief that this disconnection is the result of the inherent disorder, or even evil, of the world. This alienation has two effects: The belief that the disorder of the world can be transcended by extraordinary insight, learning, or knowledge, called a Gnostic Speculation by Voegelin (the Gnostics themselves referred to this as gnosis). The desire to create and implement a policy to actualize the speculation, or as Voegelin described it, to Immanentize the Eschaton, to create a sort of heaven on earth within history by triggering the apocalypse. Voegelin’s conception of gnosis and his analysis of Gnosticism in general has been criticized by Eugene Webb. In an article entitled &quot; Voegelin’s Gnosticism Reconsidered, &quot; Webb explains that Voegelin’s concept of Gnosticism was conceived &quot; not primarily to describe ancient phenomena but to help us understand some modern ones for which the evidence is a great deal clearer. &quot; { Webb, E; Voegelin’s “Gnosticism” Reconsidered; Political Science Reviewer; 34; 2005 } Webb continues, &quot; the category (of Gnosticism) is of limited usefulness for the purpose to which he put it…and the fact that the idea of Gnosticism as such has become so problematic and complex in recent years must at the very least undercut Voegelin’s effort to trace a historical line of descent from ancient sources to the modern phenomena he tried to use them to illuminate. &quot; { Webb, E; &quot; Voegelin’s “Gnosticism” Reconsidered &quot;; Political Science Reviewer; 34; 2005 } [ See also ] James H. Billington Juan Linz Athanasios Moulakis Eugene Webb Ellis Sandoz American philosophy List of American philosophers Eric Hoffer The Fifties Spiritual Marketplace: American Religion in a Decade of Conflict by Robert S. Ellwood Publisher: Rutgers University Press ISBN 0-8135-2346-XISBN 978-0-8135-2346-0 [ References ] [ Further reading ] [ Primary literature ] All of Voegelin&apos;s writing is published as his Collected Works (CW), which is reviewed by Mark Lilla, * &quot; Mr. Casaubon in America &quot; The New York Review of Books 54/11 (June 28, 2007) : 29-31. [ Secondary literature ] Cooper, Barry: Eric Voegelin and the Foundations of Modern Political Science, University of Missouri Press, 1999. Federici, Michael: &apos;&apos;Eric Voegelin: The Restoration of Order&apos;&apos;, ISI Books 2002, basic introduction Sandoz, Ellis: &apos;&apos;The Vogelinian Revolution: A Biographical Introduction&apos;&apos; Louisiana State UP, 1981. advanced Trepanier, Lee, and Steven F. McGuire, eds. Eric Voegelin and the Continental Tradition: Explorations in Modern Political Thought (University of Missouri Press; 2011) 284 pages; Essays on his relationship to Hegel, Schelling, Kierkegaard, Heidegger, and Gadamer. Webb, Eugene: &quot; Eric Voegelin: Philosopher of History &quot; Seattle and London: University of Washington Press, 1981. [ Primary sources ] The closest to an introduction to his thought in his own words is the: Autobiographical Reflections. A Friendship That Lasted a Lifetime: The Correspondence Between Alfred Schutz and Eric Voegelin edited by Gerhard Wagner and Gilbert Weiss, translated by William Petropulos (University of Missouri Press; 2011) 240 pages [ External links ] Coetsier, Meins G. S. Etty Hillesum and the Flow of Presence: A Voegelinian Analysis. Columbia Missouri: University of Missouri Press, 2008. Coetsier, Meins G. S. &apos; God?... Licht in het duister: Twee denkers in barre tijden: de Duitse filosoof Eric Voegelin en de Nederlands- Joodse schrijfster Etty Hillesum,&apos;&apos;&apos;in Etty Hillesum Studies: Etty Hillesum in context,&apos;&apos; red. Ria van den Brandt en Klaas A.D. Smelik, Assen: Gorcum, 2008. The Collected Works of Eric Voegelin Eric-Voegelin-Archiv The Eric Voegelin Institute The Centre of Eric Voegelin Studies(EVS),Ghent University Etty Hillesum and the Flow of Presence: A Voegelinian Analysis (engl.) (dt.) Coetsier, Meins G. S. Heaven in Hell: A Voegelinian Exploration of the Life and Writings of Etty Hillesum PDF Eric Voegelin Study Page An Eric Voegelin page Stephen Mcknight &quot; Gnosticism and Modernity: Voegelin’s Reconsiderations Twenty Years After The New Science of Politics &quot; The Eric Voegelin Colloquium (Discussion Forum) Voegelin&apos;s Theory of Consciousness applied to Dostoevsky&apos;s Possessed Intellectual Conservatives Greatest Works No 23 The suggestion of pneumopathological consciousness as the proper term of Voegelin&apos;s intended Gnosticism &quot; Voegelin in Toronto &quot; —the DVD of the famous 1978 conference in Toronto at York University featuring Eric Voegelin, Hans-Georg Gadamer, Allan Bloom, Bernard Lonergan, etc. 4½ hrs. Voegelin--Research News [Slow loading] [ November 2011 ] [ Voegelin, Eric American philosopher January 3, 1901 Cologne, Germany January 19, 1985 Stanford, California, USA ] Category:1901 births Category:1985 deaths Category:American philosophers Category:American political scientists Category:Anti-Gnosticism Category:German philosophers Category:German political scientists Category:People from Cologne Category:People from the Rhine Province Category:People who emigrated to escape Nazism Category:University of Vienna alumni Category:Louisiana State University faculty Category:Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich faculty Category:Hoover Institution people Category:Philadelphia Society members cs:Eric Voegelin de:Eric Voegelin et:Eric Voegelin es:Eric Voegelin fr:Eric Voegelin it:Eric Voegelin ja:エリック・フェーゲリン pl:Eric Voegelin pt:Eric Voegelin sk:Eric Voegelin