Five-layer mu-metal box. Each layer is about 5 mm thick. It reduces the Earth&apos;s magnetic field inside by about 1500 times. Mu-metal is a nickel - iron alloy (approximately 77% nickel, 16% iron, 5% copper and 2% chromium or molybdenum ) [ Jiles David Introduction to Magnetism and Magnetic Materials CRC Press 1998 354 http://books.google.com/?id%3DaxyWXjsdorMC%26amp%3Bpg%3DPA354%26amp%3Bdq%3Dmu%2Bmetal 0-412-79860-3 ] that is notable for its high magnetic permeability. The high permeability makes mu-metal useful for shielding against static or low-frequency magnetic field s, which cannot be attenuated by other methods. The name came from the Greek letter mu ( μ ) which represents permeability in physics and engineering formulae. A number of different proprietary formulations of the alloy are sold under trade names such as MuMetal, Mumetall, and Mumetal2; [ May 2012 ] this article will cover their common features. Mu-metal typically has relative permeability values of 80,000–100,000 compared to several thousand for ordinary steel. In addition it has low magnetic anisotropy and magnetostriction, giving it a low coercivity that results in low hysteresis loss es in AC magnetic circuits. Other high permeability nickel-iron alloys such as permalloy have similar magnetic properties; mu-metal&apos;s advantage is that it is more ductile and workable, allowing it to be easily formed into the thin sheets needed for magnetic shields. Mu-metal objects require heat treatment after they are in final form — annealing in a magnetic field in hydrogen atmosphere, which reportedly [ Mu Metal specifications Shielding Specifications Nick Murby http://mumetal.co.uk/2009/03/25/mumetal-specifications/ 2012-04-08 ] increases the magnetic permeability about 40 times. The annealing alters the material&apos;s crystal structure, aligning the grains and removing some impurities, especially carbon, which obstruct the free motion of the magnetic domain boundaries. Bending or mechanical shock after annealing may disrupt the material&apos;s grain alignment, leading to a drop in the permeability of the affected areas, which can be restored by repeating the hydrogen annealing step. [ Magnetic shielding ] The high permeability of mu-metal provides a low reluctance path for magnetic flux, leading to its major use, in magnetic shields against static or slowly varying magnetic fields. Magnetic shielding made with high permeability alloys like mu-metal works not by blocking magnetic fields but by providing a path for the magnetic field line s around the shielded area. So the best shape for shields is a closed container surrounding the shielded space. The effectiveness of mu-metal shielding decreases with the alloy&apos;s permeability, which drops off at both low field strengths and, due to saturation, at high field strengths. So mu-metal shields are often made of several enclosures one inside the other, each of which successively reduces the field inside it. RF magnetic fields above about 100 kHz can be shielded by Faraday shields, ordinary conductive metal sheets or screens which are used to shield against electric field s. [ Magnetic Fields and Shields FAQ Magnetic Shield Corp. http://www.magnetic-shield.com/faq/interference.html 2008-12-14 ] [ History ] Mu-metal submarine cable construction Mu-metal was developed by scientists named Smith and Garnett and patented in 1923 for inductive loading of submarine telegraph cable s by The Telegraph Construction and Maintenance Co. Ltd. (now Telcon Metals Ltd.), a British firm which built the Atlantic undersea telegraph cables. Mu-Metal is now a Registered Trademark brand name of Magnetic Shield Corporation in the United States and China. [ Green Allen 150 Years Of Industry &amp; Enterprise At Enderby&apos;s Wharf History of the Atlantic Cable and Undersea Communications FTL Design 2004 http://atlantic-cable.com/Article/EnderbyAG/index.htm 2008-12-14 ] [ Sowter G.A.V. Soft Magnetic Materials for Audio Transformers: History, Production, and Applications J. Audio Eng. Soc. 35 10 764–765 October, 1987 http://www.sowter.co.uk/pdf/GAVS.pdf 2008-12-15 ] The conductive seawater surrounding an undersea cable added a great deal of capacitance to the cable, causing distortion of the signal, which limited the bandwidth and slowed signaling speed to 10–12 words per minute. The bandwidth could be increased by adding inductance to compensate. This was first done by wrapping the conductors with a helical wrapping of metal tape or wire of high magnetic permeability, which confined the magnetic field. Telcon invented Mu-metal to compete with Permalloy, the first high permeability alloy used for cable compensation, whose patent rights were held by competitor Western Electric. Mu-metal was developed by adding copper to Permalloy to improve ductility. 50 miles of fine mu-metal wire was needed for each mile of cable, creating a great demand for the alloy. The first year of production Telcon was making 30 tons per week. In the 1930s this use for mu-metal declined, but by World War II many other uses were found in the electronics industry (particularly shielding for transformer s and cathode ray tube s ) as well as the fuze s inside magnetic mines. [ Uses and properties ] Mu-metal is used to shield equipment from magnetic fields. For example: Electric power transformer s, which are built with mu-metal shells to prevent them from affecting nearby circuitry Hard Drives, which have mu-metal backings to the magnets found in the drive to keep the magnetic field away from the disk. Cathode-ray tube s used in analogue oscilloscopes Magnetic phonograph cartridges, which have a mu-metal case to reduce interference when LP s are played back Magnetic resonance imaging equipment The magnetometer s used in magnetoencephalography and magnetocardiography Photomultiplier tubes Vacuum chamber s for experiments with low-energy electron s, for example photoelectron spectroscopy Superconducting circuits and especially Josephson junction circuits Other materials with similar magnetic properties include Co-Netic, supermalloy, supermumetal, nilomag, sanbold, Molybdenum permalloy, Sendust, M-1040, Hipernom, HyMu-80 and Amumetal. [ References ] [ External links ] FAQ - Information about Mu Metal Category:Nickel alloys Category:Magnetic alloys de:Mu-Metall es:Mu-metal fr:Mu-métal it:Mu-metal nl:Mumetaal pl:Mumetal zh:Μ合金