[ Lemon Grass YosriNov04Pokok Serai.JPG Lemon grass plant Plantae Angiosperms Monocots Commelinids Poales Poaceae Panicoideae Andropogoneae Andropogoninae Cymbopogon Spreng. Species About 55, see text ] Cymbopogon (lemongrass) is a genus of about 55 species of grasses, (of which the type species is Cymbopogon citratus) native to warm temperate and tropical regions of the Old World and Oceania. It is a tall perennial grass. Common names include lemon grass, lemongrass, barbed wire grass, silky heads, citronella grass,cha de Dartigalongue, fever grass, tanglad, hierba Luisa or gavati chaha amongst many others. [ Uses ] Lemongrass is native to India and tropical Asia. It is widely used as a herb in Asian cuisine. It has a subtle citrus flavor and can be dried and powdered, or used fresh. Lemongrass is commonly used in tea s, soup s, and curries. It is also suitable for poultry, fish, beef, and seafood. It is often used as a tea in African countries such as Togo and the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Latin America n countries such as Mexico. Lemongrass oil is used as a pesticide and a preservative. Research shows that lemongrass oil has anti-fungal properties. { Shadab, Q., Hanif, M. &amp; Chaudhary, F.M. (1992) Antifungal activity by lemongrass essential oils. Pak. J. Sci. Ind. Res. 35, 246-249. } { Philippines, where it is locally known as &apos;&apos;tanglad&apos;&apos;. } Citronella grass (Cymbopogon nardus and Cymbopogon winterianus) grows to about 2 meters (about 6.5 feet) and has red base stems. These species are used for the production of citronella oil, which is used in soaps, as an insect repellent in insect sprays and candles, and also in aromatherapy, which is famous in Bintan Island, Indonesia. Therefore it&apos;s assumed that its origin is from Indonesia. The principal chemical constituents of citronella, geraniol and citronellol, are antiseptics, hence their use in household disinfectants and soaps. Besides oil production, citronella grass is also used for culinary purposes, in tea and as a flavoring. Lemon Grass Oil, used as a pesticide and preservative, is put on the ancient palm-leaf manuscript s found in India as a preservative. It is used at the Oriental Research Institute Mysore, the French Institute of Pondicherry, the Association for the Preservation of the Saint Thomas Christian Heritage in Kerala and many other manuscript collections in India. The lemon grass oil also injects natural fluidity into the brittle palm leaves and the hydrophobic nature of the oil keeps the manuscripts dry so that the text is not lost to decay due to humidity. East-Indian Lemon Grass (Cymbopogon flexuosus), also called Cochin Grass or Malabar Grass (Malayalam: ഇഞ്ചിപ്പുല്ല്(inchippullu), is native to Cambodia, India, Sri Lanka, Burma,and Thailand while the West-Indian lemon grass (Cymbopogon citratus), also known as serai in Malay, is assumed to have its origins in Malaysia. Indonesian people used to called it serai too or sereh. While both can be used interchangeably, C. citratus is more suited for cooking. In India C. citratus is used both as a medical herb and in perfumes. Cymbopogon citratus is consumed as a tea for anxiety in Brazilian folk medicine, [ Blanco MM, Costa CA, Freire AO, Santos JG, Costa M Neurobehavioral effect of essential oil of Cymbopogon citratus in mice Phytomedicine 16 2–3 265–70 2009 March 17561386 10.1016/j.phymed.2007.04.007 ] but a study in humans found no effect. [ Leite JR, Seabra Mde L, Maluf E, et al. Pharmacology of lemongrass (Cymbopogon citratus Stapf). III. Assessment of eventual toxic, hypnotic and anxiolytic effects on humans J Ethnopharmacol 17 1 75–83 1986 July 2429120 10.1016/0378-8741(86)90074-7 ] The tea caused a recurrence of contact dermatitis in one case. [ Bleasel N, Tate B, Rademaker M Allergic contact dermatitis following exposure to essential oils Australas. J. Dermatol. 43 3 211–3 2002 August 12121401 10.1046/j.1440-0960.2002.00598.x ] Lemon grass is also known as Gavati Chaha (गवती चहा) in the Marathi language (Gavat=grass; Chaha=tea), and is used as an addition to tea, and in preparations like &apos;kadha,&apos; which is a traditional herbal &apos;soup&apos; used against coughs, colds, etc. It has medicinal properties and is used extensively in Ayurvedic medicine. It is supposed to help with relieving cough and nasal congestion. [ October 2011 ] In Kerala, lemon grass is steeped as an herbal tea called &quot; Chukku Kaapi &quot;, literally &quot; dried ginger coffee &quot;. [ January 2011 ] [ Images ] Lemon grass at a market Prepared Lemongrass [ Partial species list ] [ 香茅草 xiāng máo căo ] [ June 2009 ] Cymbopogon ambiguus Australian lemon-scented grass (native of Australia) Cymbopogon bombycinus Silky Oilgrass (native of Australia) Cymbopogon citratus Lemon Grass ( ) Cymbopogon citriodora West Indian lemon grass Cymbopogon flexuosus East Indian lemon grass Cymbopogon martinii Palmarosa Cymbopogon nardus Citronella Grass (In Thai language ตะไคร้หอม [dTa-Khrai-Hawm] Cymbopogon obtectus Silky-heads (native of Australia) Cymbopogon procerus (native of Australia) Cymbopogon proximus found in Egypt Cymbopogon refractus Barbed wire grass (native of Australia) Cymbopogon schoenanthus or camel hay or camel grass, southern Asia and northern Africa Cymbopogon winterianus Citronella Grass [ Notes ] Category:Poaceae genera ace:Rheuë ar:حشيشة الليمون bjn:Saray bcl:Tanglad bg:Лимонова трева ca:Cymbopogon cs:Voňatka citronová cy:Lemonwellt de:Zitronengräser et:Sidrunhein es:Cymbopogon fa:علف لیمو is:Sítrónugras it:Cymbopogon he:עשב לימון pam:Cymbopogon ht:Sitwonèl la:Cymbopogon ml:ഇഞ്ചിപ്പുല്ല് mr:गवती चहा ms:Serai makan my:စပါးလင် ja:オガルカヤ属 no:Sitrongress pnb:لیمن گراس pt:Cymbopogon ru:Цимбопогон sa:शतवेधी si:සේර simple:Cymbopogon su:Séréh fi:Sitruunaruohot sv:Citrongrässläktet tl:Tanglad ta:அருகம் புல் te:నిమ్మగడ్డి th:ตะไคร้ to:Moengālō vi:Chi Sả zh:香茅