{ 3D (left and center) and } { 2D (right) representations of the } { terpenoid molecule atisane } A molecule ( [ icon ˈ m ɒ l ɪ k juː l ] ) is an electrically neutral group of two or more atom s held together by covalent chemical bond s. [ molecule http://goldbook.iupac.org/M04002.html 1994 ] [ Pauling, Linus General Chemistry New York Dover Publications, Inc. 1970 0-486-65622-5 ] [ Ebbin, Darrell, D. General Chemistry, 3rd Ed. Boston Houghton Mifflin Co. 1990 0-395-43302-9 ] [ Brown, T.L. Chemistry – the Central Science, 9th Ed. New Jersey Prentice Hall 2003 0-13-066997-0 ] [ Chang, Raymond Chemistry, 6th Ed. New York McGraw Hill 1998 0-07-115221-0 ] [ Zumdahl, Steven S. Chemistry, 4th ed. Boston Houghton Mifflin 1997 0-669-41794-7 ] Molecules are distinguished from ion s by their lack of electrical charge. However, in quantum physics, organic chemistry, and biochemistry, the term molecule is often used less strictly, also being applied to polyatomic ion s. In the kinetic theory of gas es, the term molecule is often used for any gaseous particle regardless of its composition. According to this definition noble gas atoms are considered molecules despite the fact that they are composed of a single non-bonded atom. [ Comprehensive Inorganic Chemistry Chandra Sulekh New Age Publishers 81-224-1512-1 ] A molecule may consist of atoms of a single chemical element, as with oxygen (O 2 ), or of different elements, as with water (H 2 O). Atoms and complexes connected by non-covalent bonds such as hydrogen bond s or ionic bond s are generally not considered single molecules. { Molecule, Encyclopaedia Britannica on-line } Molecules as components of matter are common in organic substances (and therefore biochemistry). They also make up most of the oceans and atmosphere. However, the majority of familiar solid substances on Earth, including most of the minerals that make up the crust, mantle, and core of the Earth, contain many chemical bond s, but are not made of identifiable molecules. Also, no typical molecule can be defined for ionic crystals ( salts ) and covalent crystals ( network solid s ), although these are often composed of repeating unit cell s that extend either in a plane (such as in graphene ) or three-dimensionally (such as in diamond, quartz, or sodium chloride ). The theme of repeated unit-cellular-structure also holds for most condensed phases with metallic bond ing, which means that solid metals are also not made of molecules. In glass es (solids that exist in a vitreous disordered state), atoms may also be held together by chemical bonds without presence of any definable molecule, but also without any of the regularity of repeating units that characterises crystals. [ Molecular science ] The science of molecules is called molecular chemistry or molecular physics, depending on the focus. Molecular chemistry deals with the laws governing the interaction between molecules that results in the formation and breakage of chemical bond s, while molecular physics deals with the laws governing their structure and properties. In practice, however, this distinction is vague. In molecular sciences, a molecule consists of a stable system ( bound state ) comprising two or more atom s. Polyatomic ion s may sometimes be usefully thought of as electrically charged molecules. The term unstable molecule is used for very reactive species, i.e., short-lived assemblies ( resonances ) of electrons and nuclei, such as radicals, molecular ion s, Rydberg molecule s, transition state s, van der Waals complex es, or systems of colliding atoms as in Bose-Einstein condensate [ History and etymology ] [ History of molecular theory ] John Dalton According to Merriam-Webster and the Online Etymology Dictionary, the word &quot; molecule &quot; derives from the Latin &quot; moles &quot; or small unit of mass. Molecule (1794) – &quot; extremely minute particle, &quot; from Fr. molécule (1678), from Mod.L. molecula, dim. of L. moles &quot; mass, barrier &quot;. A vague meaning at first; the vogue for the word (used until late 18th century only in Latin form) can be traced to the philosophy of Descartes. Although the existence of molecules has been accepted by many chemists since the early 19th century as a result of Dalton&apos;s laws of Definite and Multiple Proportions (1803–1808) and Avogadro&apos;s law (1811), there was some resistance among positivists and physicists such as Mach, Boltzmann, Maxwell, and Gibbs, who saw molecules merely as convenient mathematical constructs. The work of Perrin on Brownian motion (1911) is considered to be the final proof of the existence of molecules. [ September 2010 ] The definition of the molecule has evolved as knowledge of the structure of molecules has increased. Earlier definitions were less precise, defining molecules as the smallest particles of pure chemical substance s that still retain their composition and chemical properties. { Molecule Definition ( } { Frostburg State University ) } This definition often breaks down since many substances in ordinary experience, such as rock s, salt s, and metal s, are composed of large networks of chemically bonded atoms or ion s, but are not made of discrete molecules. [ Molecular size ] Most molecules are far too small to be seen with the naked eye, but there are exceptions. DNA, a macromolecule, can reach macroscopic sizes, as can molecules of many polymers. The smallest molecule is the diatomic hydrogen (H 2 ), with a bond length of 0.74 Å. [ http://books.google.com/?id%3Dq77rPHP5fWMC%26amp%3Bpg%3DPA199 199 Chemical structure and bonding Roger L. DeKock, Harry B. Gray University Science Books 1989 0-935702-61-X ] Molecules commonly used as building blocks for organic synthesis have a dimension of a few Å to several dozen Å. Single molecules cannot usually be observed by light (as noted above), but small molecule s and even the outlines of individual atoms may be traced in some circumstances by use of an atomic force microscope. Some of the largest molecules are macromolecule s or supermolecule s. [ Radius ] Effective molecular radius is the size a molecule displays in solution. [ Chang RL, Deen WM, Robertson CR, Brenner BM. Permselectivity of the glomerular capillary wall: III. Restricted transport of polyanions Kidney Int. 8 4 212–218 1975 1202253 10.1038/ki.1975.104 ] [ Chang RL, Ueki IF, Troy JL, Deen WM, Robertson CR, Brenner BM. Permselectivity of the glomerular capillary wall to macromolecules. II. Experimental studies in rats using neutral dextran Biophys J. 15 9 887–906 1975 1182263 10.1016/S0006-3495(75)85863-2 1334749 1975BpJ....15..887C ] The table of permselectivity for different substances contains examples. [ Molecular formula ] A compound&apos;s empirical formula is the simplest integer ratio of the chemical element s that constitute it. For example, water is always composed of a 2:1 ratio of hydrogen to oxygen atoms, and ethyl alcohol or ethanol is always composed of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen in a 2:6:1 ratio. However, this does not determine the kind of molecule uniquely – dimethyl ether has the same ratios as ethanol, for instance. Molecules with the same atom s in different arrangements are called isomer s. Also carbohydrates, for example, have the same ratio (carbon:hydrogen:oxygen = 1:2:1) (and thus the same empirical formula) but different total numbers of atoms in the molecule. The molecular formula reflects the exact number of atoms that compose the molecule and so characterizes different molecules. However different isomers can have the same atomic composition while being different molecules. The empirical formula is often the same as the molecular formula but not always. For example, the molecule acetylene has molecular formula C 2 H 2, but the simplest integer ratio of elements is CH. The molecular mass can be calculated from the chemical formula and is expressed in conventional atomic mass unit s equal to 1/12 of the mass of a neutral carbon-12 ( 12 C isotope ) atom. For network solid s, the term formula unit is used in stoichiometric calculations. [ Molecular geometry ] [ Molecular geometry ] Molecules have fixed equilibrium geometries—bond lengths and angles— about which they continuously oscillate through vibrational and rotational motions. A pure substance is composed of molecules with the same average geometrical structure. The chemical formula and the structure of a molecule are the two important factors that determine its properties, particularly its reactivity. Isomers share a chemical formula but normally have very different properties because of their different structures. Stereoisomer s, a particular type of isomers, may have very similar physico-chemical properties and at the same time different biochemical activities. [ Molecular spectroscopy ] [ Spectroscopy ] Molecular spectroscopy deals with the response ( spectrum ) of molecules interacting with probing signals of known energy (or frequency, according to Planck&apos;s formula ). Molecules have quantized energy levels that can be analyzed by detecting the molecule&apos;s energy exchange through absorbance or emission. [ spectroscopy 10.1351/goldbook.S05848 1997,2006 ] Spectroscopy does not generally refer to diffraction studies where particles such as neutrons, electrons, or high energy X-ray s interact with a regular arrangement of molecules (as in a crystal). [ Theoretical aspects ] The study of molecules by molecular physics and theoretical chemistry is largely based on quantum mechanic s and is essential for the understanding of the chemical bond. The simplest of molecules is the hydrogen molecule-ion, H 2 +, and the simplest of all the chemical bonds is the one-electron bond. H 2 + is composed of two positively charged proton s and one negatively charged electron, which means that the Schrödinger equation for the system can be solved more easily due to the lack of electron–electron repulsion. With the development of fast digital computers, approximate solutions for more complicated molecules became possible and are one of the main aspects of computational chemistry. When trying to define rigorously whether an arrangement of atoms is &quot; sufficiently stable &quot; to be considered a molecule, IUPAC suggests that it &quot; must correspond to a depression on the potential energy surface that is deep enough to confine at least one vibrational state &quot;. This definition does not depend on the nature of the interaction between the atoms, but only on the strength of the interaction. In fact, it includes weakly bound species that would not traditionally be considered molecules, such as the helium dimer, He 2, which has one vibrational bound state [ Anderson JB Comment on &quot; An exact quantum Monte Carlo calculation of the helium-helium intermolecular potential &quot; [J. Chem. Phys. 115, 4546 (2001)] J Chem Phys 120 20 9886–7 2004 May 15268005 10.1063/1.1704638 2004JChPh.120.9886A ] and is so loosely bound that it is only likely to be observed at very low temperatures. [ See also ] [ Molecules ] [ 3 ] Atom Van der Waals molecule Diatomic molecule Small molecule Chemical polarity Molecular geometry Covalent bond Noncovalent bonding list of compounds for a list of chemical compounds List of molecules in interstellar space Software for molecular mechanics modeling Molecular Hamiltonian Molecular ion Molecular orbital Molecular modelling Molecular design software WorldWide Molecular Matrix Periodic Systems of Small Molecules [ References ] [ 2 ] [ External links ] Molecule of the Month – School of Chemistry, University of Bristol Category:Matter Category:Chemistry af:Molekuul als:Molekül ar:جزيء an:Molecula as:অণু ast:Molécula az:Molekul bn:অণু zh-min-nan:Hun-chú be:Малекула be-x-old:Малекула bg:Молекула bar:Molekui bs:Molekula br:Molekulenn ca:Molècula ceb:Molekula cs:Molekula cy:Moleciwl da:Molekyle de:Molekül dsb:Molekul et:Molekul el:Μόριο es:Molécula eo:Molekulo eu:Molekula fa:مولکول fo:Mýl fr:Molécule fy:Molekule ga:Móilín gl:Molécula xal:Молекул ko:분자 hi:अणु hsb:Molekul hr:Molekula io:Molekulo id:Molekul ia:Molecula os:Молекулæ is:Sameind it:Molecola he:מולקולה jv:Molekul kn:ಅಣು pam:Molecule ka:მოლეკულა kk:Молекула sw:Molekuli ku:Molekul la:Molecula lv:Molekula lt:Molekulė jbo:xumsle lmo:Mulecula hu:Molekula mk:Молекула ml:തന്മാത്ര (രസതന്ത്രം) mr:रेणू ms:Molekul mn:Молекул my:မော်လီကျူး nl:Molecuul ja:分子 no:Molekyl nn:Molekyl nrm:Molétchule nov:Molekule oc:Molecula uz:Molekula pnb:مالیکیول pms:Molécola nds:Molekül pl:Cząsteczka pt:Molécula ro:Moleculă qu:Iñuwa rue:Молекула ru:Молекула sq:Molekula simple:Molecule sk:Molekula sl:Molekula sr:Молекул sh:Molekula su:Molekul fi:Molekyyli sv:Molekyl tl:Molekula ta:மூலக்கூறு tt:Молекула th:โมเลกุล tr:Molekül uk:Молекула ur:سالمہ ug:مولېكۇلا vi:Phân tử fiu-vro:Molõkul war:Molekula yi:מאלעקול zh-yue:分子 bat-smg:Muolekolė zh:分子