[ Pneumatic the highest order of humans in Gnosticism Pneumatic (Gnosticism) ] { Porter Locomotive Company No. 3290 of 1923. } Pneumatics is a section of technology that deals with the study and application of pressurized gas to effect mechanical motion. Pneumatic systems are extensively used in industry, where factories are commonly plumbed with compressed air or compressed inert gases. This is because a centrally located and electrically powered compressor that powers cylinders and other pneumatic devices through solenoid valve s is often able to provide motive power in a cheaper, safer, more flexible, and more reliable way than a large number of electric motor s and actuator s. Pneumatics also has applications in dentistry, construction, mining, and other areas. [ Examples of pneumatic systems and components ] Pneumatic circuit. Air brakes on bus es and truck s Air brakes, on train s Air compressors Air engine s for pneumatically powered vehicles Barostat systems used in Neurogastroenterology and for researching electricity Cable jetting, a way to install cables in ducts Compressed-air engine and compressed-air vehicle s Gas-operated reloading Holman Projector, a pneumatic anti-aircraft weapon Inflatable structure s Lego pneumatics can be used to build pneumatic models Exercise machine s Electro-pneumatic action Tubular-pneumatic action Pneumatic actuator Pneumatic air guns Pneumatic bladder Pneumatic cylinder Pneumatic Launchers, a type of spud gun Pneumatic mail systems Pneumatic motor Pneumatic tire Jackhammer used by road workers Pneumatic nailgun Pressure regulator Pressure sensor Pressure switch Vacuum pump [ Gases used in pneumatic systems ] Pneumatic systems in fixed installations such as factories use compressed air because a sustainable supply can be made by compressing atmospheric air. The air usually has moisture removed and a small quantity of oil added at the compressor, to avoid corrosion of mechanical components and to lubricate them. Factory-plumbed, pneumatic-power users need not worry about poisonous leakages as the gas is commonly just air. Smaller or stand-alone systems can use other compressed gases which are an asphyxiation hazard, such as nitrogen - often referred to as OFN (oxygen-free nitrogen), when supplied in cylinders. Any compressed gas other than air is an asphyxiation hazard - including nitrogen, which makes up 77% of air. Compressed oxygen (approx. 23% of air) would not asphyxiate, but it would be an extreme fire hazard, so is never used in pneumatically powered devices. Portable pneumatic tools and small vehicles such as Robot Wars machines and other hobbyist applications are often powered by compressed carbon dioxide because containers designed to hold it such as soda stream canisters and fire extinguishers are readily available, and the phase change between liquid and gas makes it possible to obtain a larger volume of compressed gas from a lighter container than compressed air would allow. Carbon dioxide is an asphyxiant and can also be a freezing hazard when vented inappropriately. [ Comparison to hydraulics ] Both pneumatics and hydraulics are applications of fluid power. Pneumatics uses an easily compressible gas such as air or a suitable pure gas, while hydraulics uses relatively incompressible liquid media such as oil. Most industrial pneumatic applications use pressures of about [ 80 to 100 psi kPa on ]. Hydraulics applications commonly use from [ 1000 to 5000 psi MPa on ], but specialized applications may exceed [ 10000 psi MPa on ]. [ Advantages of pneumatics ] Machines are easily designed using standard cylinders &amp; other components. Machines operate by simple ON - OFF type control. { Reliability } Pneumatic systems tend to have long operating lives and require very little maintenance. Because gas is compressible, the equipment is less likely to be damaged by shock. The gas in pneumatics absorbs excessive force, whereas the fluid of hydraulics directly transfers force. { Storage } Compressed gas can be stored, allowing the use of machines when electrical power is lost. { Safety } Very low chance of fire (compared to hydraulic oil). Machines can be designed to be overload safe. [ Advantages of hydraulics ] Liquid (as a gas is also a &apos;fluid&apos;) does not absorb any of the supplied energy. Capable of moving much higher loads and providing much higher forces due to the incompressibility. The hydraulic working fluid is basically incompressible, leading to a minimum of spring action. When hydraulic fluid flow is stopped, the slightest motion of the load releases the pressure on the load; there is no need to &quot; bleed off &quot; pressurized air to release the pressure on the load. [ Pneumatic logic ] [ Pneumatic circuit ] Pneumatic logic systems (sometimes called air logic control) are often used to control industrial processes, consisting of primary logic units such as: And Units Or Units &apos;Relay or Booster&apos; Units Latching Units &apos;Timer&apos; Units Sorteberg relay Fluidics amplifiers with no moving parts other than the air itself Pneumatic logic is a reliable and functional control method for industrial processes. In recent years, these systems have largely been replaced by electrical control systems, due to the smaller size and lower cost of electrical components. Pneumatic devices are still used in processes where compressed air is the only energy source available or upgrade cost, safety, and other considerations outweigh the advantage of modern digital control. [ See also ] Ozone cracking Polymer degradation Pneudraulics [ References ] [ February 2010 ] Compressed Air Operations Manual, ISBN 0-07-147526-5, McGraw Hill Book Company [ External links ] Four Ways to Boost Pneumatic Efficiency Pneumatic Symbols DWG/DXF Category:Pneumatics ar:تكنولوجيا الغازات المنضغطة bs:Pneumatika ca:Pneumàtica da:Pneumatik de:Pneumatik et:Pneumaatika es:Neumática eo:Pneŭmatiko fr:Énergie pneumatique gl:Pneumática hr:Pneumatika id:Pneumatik it:Pneumatica (scienza) he:פנאומטיקה mk:Пневматика nl:Pneumatiek ja:空圧 no:Pneumatikk nn:Pneumatikk pl:Pneumatyka pt:Pneumática ru:Пневматика simple:Pneumatics sv:Pneumatik tr:Pnömatik