A Pyrrhic victory ( [ &apos; p ɪr ɪ k ] ) is a victory with such a devastating cost that it carries the implication that another such victory will ultimately lead to defeat. Someone who wins a &quot; Pyrrhic victory &quot; has been victorious in some way; however, the heavy toll and/or the detrimental consequences negates any sense of achievement or profit. There is, therefore, no reason to celebrate. [ Origin ] The phrase is named after King Pyrrhus of Epirus, whose army suffered irreplaceable casualties in defeating the Romans at Heraclea in 280 BC and Asculum in 279 BC during the Pyrrhic War. After the latter battle, Plutarch relates in a report by Dionysius : [ The armies separated; and, it is said, Pyrrhus replied to one that gave him joy of his victory that one more such victory would utterly undo him. For he had lost a great part of the forces he brought with him, and almost all his particular friends and principal commanders; there were no others there to make recruits, and he found the confederates in Italy backward. On the other hand, as from a fountain continually flowing out of the city, the Roman camp was quickly and plentifully filled up with fresh men, not at all abating in courage for the loss they sustained, but even from their very anger gaining new force and resolution to go on with the war. Plutarch Plutarch (trans. John Dryden) Pyrrhus, hosted on The Internet Classics Archive ] In both of Pyrrhus&apos;s victories, the Romans suffered greater casualties than Pyrrhus did. However, the Romans had a much larger supply of men from which to draw soldiers, so their casualties did less damage to their war effort than Pyrrhus&apos;s casualties did to his. The report is often quoted as &quot; Another such victory and I come back to Epirus alone &quot;, { &quot; Ne ego si iterum eodem modo uicero, sine ullo milite Epirum reuertar &quot; : } { Orosius, Historiarum Adversum Paganos Libri, IV, 1.15. } or &quot; If we are victorious in one more battle with the Romans, we shall be utterly ruined. &quot; { Plutarch, Life of Pyrrhus, 21:8. } The term is used as an analogy in fields such as business, politics, and sports to describe struggles that end up ruining the victor. Theologian Reinhold Niebuhr, for example, commented on the necessity of coercion in preserving the course of justice by warning, &quot; Moral reason must learn how to make coercion its ally without running the risk of a Pyrrhic victory in which the ally exploits and negates the triumph. &quot; { Niebuhr, Reinhold Moral man and Immoral Society, published by Scribner, 1932 and 1960, reprinted by Westminster John Knox Press, 2002, ISBN 0-664-22474-1, ISBN 978-0-664-22474-5 p. 238. } Also, in Beauharnais v. Illinois, a 1952 U.S. Supreme Court decision involving a charge proscribing group libel, Justice Hugo Black alluded to the Pyrrhic War in his dissent : &quot; If minority groups hail this holding as their victory, they might consider the possible relevancy of this ancient remark: &apos;Another such victory and I am undone. [ Beauharnais v. Illinois 343 250 U.S. 1952 http://caselaw.lp.findlaw.com/cgi-bin/getcase.pl?court%3Dus%26amp%3Bvol%3D343%26amp%3Binvol%3D250 ] [ Examples ] Battle of Heraclea (280 BC)  – Pyrrhus of Epirus + Italian allies against the Romans Battle of Asculum (279 BC)  – Pyrrhus of Epirus + Italian allies against the Romans Battle of Didao  - one of Jiang Wei&apos;s Northern Expeditions during the Three Kingdoms. Shu Han VS Cao Wei Battle of Karbala (10 Muharram 61, October 10, 680 AD)  – Ahl ul-Bayt against Umayyads. Deluge (history) (1655-1660)  - premises to fall of Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth - Partitions of Poland Battle of Malplaquet (A.D. 1709)  – War of the Spanish Succession Battle of Bunker Hill (1775)  - American Revolutionary War Battle of Guilford Court House (1781)  - American Revolutionary War Battle of Borodino (1812)  - French Invasion of Russia Battle of the Alamo (1836)  - Texas Revolution Battle of Langensalza (1866)  - Austro-Prussian War Battle of Crete (1941)  – World War II Battle of the Santa Cruz Islands (1942)  – World War II Pacific theatre, Solomon Islands Campaign Battle of Monte Cassino  - World War II Europe Theatre Unternehmen Bodenplatte (1945)  – World War II, Battle of the Bulge Battle of Chosin Reservoir (1950)  – Korean War Battle of Vukovar (1991)  – Croatian War of Independence [ See also ] Attrition warfare Cadmean victory Catch-22 Mexican standoff Moral victory Mutually assured destruction (MAD) No-win situation Nuclear holocaust Poison pill Spite house Winner&apos;s curse Zugzwang Parthian shot [ References ] Denson, John, The Costs of War: America&apos;s Pyrrhic Victories. Transaction Publishers (1997). ISBN 1-56000-319-7. Category:Attrition warfare Category:Wars involving the Roman Republic Category:Military terminology Category:Military strategy Category:Metaphors referring to war and violence Category:Victory Category:Pyrrhic War be-x-old:Пірава перамога bg:Пирова победа bs:Pirova pobjeda ca:Victòria pírrica cs:Pyrrhovo vítězství da:Pyrrhussejr de:Pyrrhussieg et:Pyrrhose võit el:Πύρρειος νίκη es:Victoria pírrica eo:Venko de Pirho eu:Garaipen pirriko fr:Victoire à la Pyrrhus gl:Vitoria pírrica ko:피로스의 승리 hi:पिरिक जीत hr:Pirova pobjeda id:Kemenangan Piris ia:Victoria pyrrhic is:Pyrrhosarsigur it:Vittoria di Pirro he:ניצחון פירוס ka:პიროსის გამარჯვება lt:Pyro pergalė mk:Пирова победа nl:Pyrrusoverwinning ja:ピュロスの勝利 no:Pyrrhosseier nn:Pyrrhossiger pl:Pyrrusowe zwycięstwo pt:Vitória pírrica ro:Victorie à la Pirus ru:Пиррова победа simple:Pyrrhic victory sk:Pyrrhovo víťazstvo sl:Pirova zmaga sr:Пирова победа sh:Pirova pobjeda fi:Pyrrhos#Pyrrhoksen voitto sv:Pyrrhusseger ta:பிர்ரிய வெற்றி tr:Pirus zaferi uk:Піррова перемога vi:Chiến thắng kiểu Pyrros zh:皮洛士式胜利