Structure of monolithic and microkernel-based operating systems, respectively In computer science, a microkernel is the near-minimum amount of software that can provide the mechanisms needed to implement an operating system (OS). These mechanisms include low-level address space management, thread management, and inter-process communication (IPC). If the hardware provides multiple rings or CPU modes, the microkernel is the only software executing at the most privileged level (generally referred to as supervisor or kernel mode ). [ August 2011 ] Traditional operating system functions, such as device driver s, protocol stack s and file system s, are removed from the microkernel to run in user space. [ August 2011 ] In source code size, microkernels tend to be under 10,000 lines of code, as a general rule. MINIX &apos;s kernel, for example has less than 6,000 lines of code [ http://www.minix3.org/ The MINIX 3 Operating System minix3.org http://www.webcitation.org/64sAstWXM 2012-01-20 ]. Kernels larger than 20,000 lines are generally not considered microkernels. [ August 2011 ] Microkernels developed in the 1980s as a response to changes in the computer world, and several challenges adapting existing &quot; mono-kernels &quot; to these new systems. New device drivers, protocol stacks, file systems and other low-level systems were being developed all the time, code that was normally located in the monolithic kernel, and thus required considerable work and careful code management to work on. Microkernels were developed with the idea that all of these services would be implemented as user-space programs, like any other, allowing them to be worked on monolithically and started and stopped like any other program. This would not only allow these services to be more easily worked on, but also separated the kernel code to allow it to be finely tuned without worrying about unintended side effects. Moreover, it would allow entirely new operating systems to be &quot; built up &quot; on a common core, aiding OS research. Microkernels were a very hot topic in the 1980s when the first usable local area network s were being introduced. The same mechanisms that allowed the kernel to be distributed into user space also allowed the system to be distributed across network links. The first microkernels, notably Mach, proved to have disappointing performance, but the inherent advantages appeared so great that it was a major line of research into the late 1990s. However, during this time the speed of computers grew greatly in relation to networking systems, and the disadvantages in performance came to overwhelm the advantages in development terms. Many attempts were made to adapt the existing systems to have better performance, but the overhead was always considerable and most of these efforts required the user-space programs to be moved back into the kernel. By 2000, most large-scale (Mach-like) efforts had ended, although OpenStep used an adapted Mach kernel called XNU, which is now used in the OS known as Darwin, which is the open source part of Mac OS X [ Porting UNIX/Linux Applications to Mac OS X Apple 26 April 2011 ] Although major work on microkernels largely ended, experimenters continued development. It has since been shown that many of the performance problems of earlier designs were not a fundamental requirement of the concept, but instead due to the designer&apos;s desire to use single-purpose systems to implement as many of these services as possible. Using a more pragmatic approach to the problem, including assembly code and relying on the processor to enforce concepts normally supported in software led to a new series of microkernels with dramatically improved performance. The historical term nanokernel has been used to distinguish modern, high-performance microkernels from earlier implementations which still contained many system services. However, as nanokernels have all but replaced their microkernel progenitors, the term has fallen into disuse. Microkernels are closely related to exokernel s. [ Liedtke Jochen September 1996 Towards Real Microkernels Communications of the ACM 39 9 70–77 10.1145/234215.234473 ] They also have much in common with hypervisor s, [ Are Virtual-Machine Monitors Microkernels Done Right? Heiser, Gernot; Uhlig, Volkmar and LeVasseur, Joshua ACM SIGOPS Operating Systems Review 40 1 95–99 January 2006 http://l4ka.org/publications/2006/p95-heiser.pdf ACM 10.1145/1113361.1113363 PDF ] but the latter make no claim to minimality and are specialized to supporting virtual machine s; indeed, the L4 microkernel frequently finds use in a hypervisor capacity. [ Introduction ] Early operating system kernels were rather small, partly because computer memory was limited. As the capability of computers grew, the number of devices the kernel had to control also grew. Through the early history of Unix, kernels were generally small, even though those kernels contained device drivers and file system managers. When address spaces increased from 16 to 32 bits, kernel design was no longer cramped by the hardware architecture, and kernels began to grow. The Berkeley Software Distribution (BSD) of Unix began the era of big kernels. In addition to operating a basic system consisting of the CPU, disks and printers, BSD started adding additional file system s, a complete TCP/IP networking system, and a number of &quot; virtual &quot; devices that allowed the existing programs to work invisibly over the network. This growth continued for many years, resulting in kernels with millions of lines of source code. As a result of this growth, kernels were more prone to bugs and became increasingly difficult to maintain. The microkernel was designed to address the increasing growth of kernels and the difficulties that came with them. In theory, the microkernel design allows for easier management of code due to its division into user space services. This also allows for increased security and stability resulting from the reduced amount of code running in kernel mode. For example, if a networking service crashed due to buffer overflow, only the networking service&apos;s memory would be corrupted, leaving the rest of the system still functional. [ Inter-process communication ] Inter-process communication (IPC) is any mechanism which allows separate processes to communicate with each other, usually by sending messages. Shared memory is strictly speaking also an inter-process communication mechanism, but the abbreviation IPC usually only refers to message passing, and it is the latter that is particularly relevant to microkernels. IPC allows the operating system to be built from a number of small programs called servers, which are used by other programs on the system, invoked via IPC. Most or all support for peripheral hardware is handled in this fashion, with servers for device drivers, network protocol stacks, file systems, graphics, etc. IPC can be synchronous or asynchronous. Asynchronous IPC is analogous to network communication: the sender dispatches a message and continues executing. The receiver checks (polls) for the availability of the message by attempting a receive, or is alerted to it via some notification mechanism. Asynchronous IPC requires that the kernel maintains buffers and queues for messages, and deals with buffer overflows; it also requires double copying of messages (sender to kernel and kernel to receiver). In synchronous IPC, the first party (sender or receiver) blocks until the other party is ready to perform the IPC. It does not require buffering or multiple copies, but the implicit rendezvous can make programming tricky. Most programmers prefer asynchronous send and synchronous receive. First-generation microkernels typically supported synchronous as well as asynchronous IPC, and suffered from poor IPC performance. Jochen Liedtke identified the design and implementation of the IPC mechanisms as the underlying reason for this poor performance. In his L4 microkernel he pioneered methods that lowered IPC costs by an order of magnitude. [ Jochen Liedtke Jochen Liedtke Improving IPC by kernel design 14th ACM Symposium on Operating System Principles 175–88 December 1993 Asheville, NC, USA http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi%3D10.1.1.40.1293%26amp%3Brep%3Drep1%26amp%3Btype%3Dpdf ] These include an IPC system call that supports a send as well as a receive operation, making all IPC synchronous, and passing as much data as possible in registers. Furthermore, Liedtke introduced the concept of the direct process switch, where during an IPC execution an (incomplete) context switch is performed from the sender directly to the receiver. If, as in L4, part or all of the message is passed in registers, this transfers the in-register part of the message without any copying at all. Furthermore, the overhead of invoking the scheduler is avoided; this is especially beneficial in the common case where IPC is used in an RPC -type fashion by a client invoking a server. Another optimization, called lazy scheduling, avoids traversing scheduling queues during IPC by leaving threads that block during IPC in the ready queue. Once the scheduler is invoked, it moves such threads to the appropriate waiting queue. As in many cases a thread gets unblocked before the next scheduler invocation, this approach saves significant work. Similar approaches have since been adopted by QNX and MINIX 3. [ August 2010 ] In a client-server system, most communication is essentially synchronous, even if using asynchronous primitives, as the typical operation is a client invoking a server and then waiting for a reply. As it also lends itself to more efficient implementation, modern microkernels generally follow L4&apos;s lead and only provide a synchronous IPC primitive. Asynchronous IPC can be implemented on top by using helper threads. However, versions of L4 deployed in commercial products have found it necessary to add an asynchronous notification mechanism to better support asynchronous communication. This signal -like mechanism does not carry data and therefore does not require buffering by the kernel. As synchronous IPC blocks the first party until the other is ready, unrestricted use could easily lead to deadlocks. Furthermore, a client could easily mount a denial-of-service attack on a server by sending a request and never attempting to receive the reply. Therefore synchronous IPC must provide a means to prevent indefinite blocking. Many microkernels provide timeouts on IPC calls, which limit the blocking time. In practice, choosing sensible timeout values is difficult, and systems almost inevitably use infinite timeouts for clients and zero timeouts for servers. As a consequence, the trend is towards not providing arbitrary timeouts, but only a flag which indicates that the IPC should fail immediately if the partner is not ready. This approach effectively provides a choice of the two timeout values of zero and infinity. Recent versions of L4 and MINIX have gone down this path (older versions of L4 used timeouts, as does QNX). [ Servers ] Microkernel servers are essentially daemon programs like any others, except that the kernel grants some of them privileges to interact with parts of physical memory that are otherwise off limits to most programs. This allows some servers, particularly device drivers, to interact directly with hardware. A basic set of servers for a general-purpose microkernel includes file system servers, device driver servers, networking servers, display servers, and user interface device servers. This set of servers (drawn from QNX ) provides roughly the set of services offered by a Unix monolithic kernel. The necessary servers are started at system startup and provide services, such as file, network, and device access, to ordinary application programs. With such servers running in the environment of a user application, server development is similar to ordinary application development, rather than the build-and-boot process needed for kernel development. Additionally, many &quot; crashes &quot; can be corrected by simply stopping and restarting the server. However, part of the system state is lost with the failing server, hence this approach requires applications to cope with failure. A good example is a server responsible for TCP/IP connections: If this server is restarted, applications will experience a &quot; lost &quot; connection, a normal occurrence in networked system. For other services, failure is less expected and may require changes to application code. For QNX, restart capability is offered as the QNX High Availability Toolkit. { http://www.qnx.com/download/download/8107/QNX_High_Availability_Toolkit.pdf } [ June 2009 ] { QNX High Availability Toolkit } To make all servers restartable, some microkernels have concentrated on adding various database -like methods such as transaction s, replication and checkpointing to preserve essential state across single server restarts. An example is ChorusOS, which was made for high-availability applications in the telecommunication s world. Chorus included features to allow any &quot; properly written &quot; server to be restarted at any time, with clients using those servers being paused while the server brought itself back into its original state. [ February 2007 ] However, such kernel features are incompatible with the minimality principle, and are thus not provided in modern microkernels, which instead rely on appropriate user-level protocols. [ Device drivers ] Device driver s frequently perform direct memory access (DMA), and therefore can write to arbitrary locations of physical memory, including over kernel data structures. Such drivers must therefore be trusted. It is a common misconception that this means that they must be part of the kernel. In fact, a driver is not inherently more or less trustworthy by being part of the kernel. While running a device driver in user space does not necessarily reduce the damage a misbehaving driver can cause, in practice it is beneficial for system stability in the presence of buggy (rather than malicious) drivers: memory-access violations by the driver code itself (as opposed to the device) may still be caught by the memory-management hardware. Furthermore, many devices are not DMA-capable, their drivers can be made untrusted by running them in user space. Recently, an increasing number of computers feature IOMMU s, many of which can be used to restrict a device&apos;s access to physical memory. [ I/O, I/O, It&apos;s Off to Virtual Work We Go http://www.elecdesign.com/Articles/Index.cfm?AD%3D1%26amp%3BArticleID%3D15350 Wong William Electronic Design 2007-04-27 2009-06-08 ] (IBM mainframes have had IO MMUs since the IBM System/360 Model 67 and System/370.) This also allows user-mode drivers to become untrusted. User-mode drivers actually predate microkernels. The Michigan Terminal System (MTS), in 1967, supported user space drivers (including its file system support), the first operating system to be designed with that capability. [ Organization and Features of the Michigan Terminal System Michael T. Alexander Proceedings of the November 16–18, 1971, fall joint computer conference 40 1971 589–591 10.1145/1478873.1478951 ] Historically, drivers were less of a problem, as the number of devices was small and trusted anyway, so having them in the kernel simplified the design and avoided potential performance problems. This led to the traditional driver-in-the-kernel style of Unix, [ Lions&apos; Commentary on UNIX 6th Edition, with Source Code Lions John 1977-08-01 978-1-57398-013-5 Peer-To-Peer Communications ], Linux, and Windows before Windows XP.With the proliferation of various kinds of peripherals, the amount of driver code escalated and in modern operating systems dominates the kernel in code size. [ Essential components and minimality ] As a microkernel must allow building arbitrary operating system services on top, it must provide some core functionality. At a minimum, this includes: some mechanisms for dealing with address space s — this is required for managing memory protection; some execution abstraction to manage CPU allocation — typically threads or scheduler activation s; and inter-process communication — required to invoke servers running in their own address spaces. This minimal design was pioneered by Brinch Hansen &apos;s Nucleus and the hypervisor of IBM&apos;s VM. It has since been formalised in Liedtke&apos;s minimality principle: A concept is tolerated inside the microkernel only if moving it outside the kernel, i.e., permitting competing implementations, would prevent the implementation of the system&apos;s required functionality. [ Jochen Liedtke Jochen Liedtke On µ-Kernel Construction 15th ACM symposium on Operating Systems Principles 237–250 1995 December 10.1145/224056.224075 ] Everything else can be done in a usermode program, although device drivers implemented as user programs may on some processor architectures require special privileges to access I/O hardware. Related to the minimality principle, and equally important for microkernel design, is the separation of mechanism and policy, it is what enables the construction of arbitrary systems on top of a minimal kernel. Any policy built into the kernel cannot be overwritten at user level and therefore limits the generality of the microkernel. Policy implemented in user-level servers can be changed by replacing the servers (or letting the application choose between competing servers offering similar services). For efficiency, most microkernels contain schedulers and manage timers, in violation of the minimality principle and the principle of policy-mechanism separation. Start up ( booting ) of a microkernel-based system requires device driver s, which are not part of the kernel. Typically this means that they are packaged with the kernel in the boot image, and the kernel supports a bootstrap protocol that defines how the drivers are located and started; this is the traditional bootstrap procedure of L4 microkernels. Some microkernels simplify this by placing some key drivers inside the kernel (in violation of the minimality principle), LynxOS and the original Minix are examples. Some even include a file system in the kernel to simplify booting. A microkernel-based system may boot via multiboot compatible boot loader. Such systems usually load statically-linked servers to make an initial bootstrap or mount an OS image to continue bootstrapping. A key component of a microkernel is a good IPC system and virtual-memory-manager design that allows implementing page-fault handling and swapping in usermode servers in a safe way. Since all services are performed by usermode programs, efficient means of communication between programs are essential, far more so than in monolithic kernels. The design of the IPC system makes or breaks a microkernel. To be effective, the IPC system must not only have low overhead, but also interact well with CPU scheduling. [ Performance ] On most mainstream processors, obtaining a service is inherently more expensive in a microkernel-based system than a monolithic system. In the monolithic system, the service is obtained by a single system call, which requires two mode switches (changes of the processor&apos;s ring or CPU mode ). In the microkernel-based system, the service is obtained by sending an IPC message to a server, and obtaining the result in another IPC message from the server. This requires a context switch if the drivers are implemented as processes, or a function call if they are implemented as procedures. In addition, passing actual data to the server and back may incur extra copying overhead, while in a monolithic system the kernel can directly access the data in the client&apos;s buffers. Performance is therefore a potential issue in microkernel systems. Indeed, the experience of first-generation microkernels such as Mach and ChorusOS showed that systems based on them performed very poorly. [ Bradley Chen Bershad, Brian The Impact of Operating System Structure on Memory System Performance 14th ACM Symposium on Operating System Principles 120–33 December 1993 Asheville, NC, USA 10.1145/168619.168629 ] However, Jochen Liedtke showed that Mach&apos;s performance problems were the result of poor design and implementation, and specifically Mach&apos;s excessive page cache footprint. Liedtke demonstrated with his own L4 microkernel that through careful design and implementation, and especially by following the minimality principle, IPC costs could be reduced by more than an order of magnitude compared to Mach. L4&apos;s IPC performance is still unbeaten across a range of architectures. [ Jochen Liedtke Jochen Liedtke Elphinstone, Kevin; Schönberg, Sebastian; Härtig, Hermann; Heiser, Gernot; Islam, Nayeem; Jaeger, Trent Achieved IPC performance (still the foundation for extensibility) 6th Workshop on Hot Topics in Operating Systems 28–31 IEEE May 1997 Cape Cod, MA, USA http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpl/RecentCon.jsp?punumber%3D4643 ] [ Charles Gray Chapman, Matthew; Chubb, Peter; Mosberger-Tang, David; Heiser, Gernot Itanium —a system implementor&apos;s tale USENIX Annual Technical Conference 264–278 April 2005 Annaheim, CA, USA http://www.usenix.org/publications/library/proceedings/usenix05/tech/general/gray.html ] [ Carl van Schaik Heiser, Gernot High-performance microkernels and virtualisation on ARM and segmented architectures 1st International Workshop on Microkernels for Embedded Systems 11–21 NICTA January 2007 Sydney, Australia http://ertos.nicta.com.au/publications 2007-04-01 ] While these results demonstrate that the poor performance of systems based on first-generation microkernels is not representative for second-generation kernels such as L4, this constitutes no proof that microkernel-based systems can be built with good performance. It has been shown that a monolithic Linux server ported to L4 exhibits only a few percent overhead over native Linux. [ Hermann Härtig Hohmuth, Michael; Liedtke, Jochen; Schönberg, Sebastian The performance of µ-kernel-based systems Proceedings of the sixteenth ACM symposium on Operating systems principles 1997 October http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?id%3D266660%26amp%3Bdl%3DACM%26amp%3Bcoll%3D%26amp%3BCFID%3D15151515%26amp%3BCFTOKEN%3D6184618 66–77 10.1145/268998.266660 0-89791-916-5 ] However, such a single-server system exhibits few, if any, of the advantages microkernels are supposed to provide by structuring operating system functionality into separate servers. A number of commercial multi-server systems exist, in particular the real-time systems QNX and Integrity. No comprehensive comparison of performance relative to monolithic systems has been published for those multiserver systems. Furthermore, performance does not seem to be the overriding concern for those commercial systems, which instead emphasize reliably quick interrupt handling response times (QNX) and simplicity for the sake of robustness. An attempt to build a high-performance multiserver operating system was the IBM Sawmill Linux project. [ Alain Gefflaut Jaeger, Trent; Park, Yoonho; Liedtke, Jochen; Elphinstone, Kevin J.; Uhlig, Volkmar; Tidswell, Jonathon E.; Deller, Luke; Reuther, Lars The Sawmill multiserver approach 9th ACM SIGOPS European Worshop Kolding, Denmark 109–114 2000 ] However, this project was never completed. It has been shown in the meantime that user-level device drivers can come close to the performance of in-kernel drivers even for such high-throughput, high-interrupt devices as Gigabit Ethernet. [ Leslie Ben Chubb, Peter; FitzRoy-Dale, Nicholas; Götz, Stefan; Gray, Charles; Macpherson, Luke; Potts, Daniel; Shen, Yueting; Elphinstone, Kevin; Heiser, Gernot 2005 September User-level device drivers: achieved performance Journal of Computer Science and Technology 20 5 654–664 10.1007/s11390-005-0654-4 ] This seems to imply that high-performance multi-server systems are possible. [ Security ] The security benefits of microkernels have been frequently discussed. { Tanenbaum, Andrew S., Tanenbaum-Torvalds debate, part II } { Tanenbaum, A., Herder, J. and Bos, H. (May 2006). } In the context of security the minimality principle of microkernels is a direct consequence of the principle of least privilege, according to which all code should have only the privileges needed to provide required functionality. Minimality requires that a system&apos;s trusted computing base (TCB) should be kept minimal. As the kernel (the code that executes in the privileged mode of the hardware) is always part of the TCB, minimizing it is natural in a security-driven design. Consequently, microkernel designs have been used for systems designed for high-security applications, including KeyKOS, EROS and military systems. In fact common criteria (CC) at the highest assurance level ( Evaluation Assurance Level (EAL) 7) has an explicit requirement that the target of evaluation be “simple”, an acknowledgment of the practical impossibility of establishing true trustworthiness for a complex system. [ Third generation ] Recent work on microkernels has been focusing on formal specifications of the kernel API, and formal proofs of security properties of the API. The first example of this is a mathematical proof of the confinement mechanisms in EROS, based on a simplified model of the EROS API. [ Jonathan S. Shapiro Weber, Samuel Verifying the EROS Confinement Mechanism IEEE Conference on Security and Privacy http://www.eros-os.org/papers/oakland2000.ps ] More recently, a comprehensive set of machine-checked proofs has been performed of the properties of the protection model of seL4, a version of L4. [ Dhammika Elkaduwe Gerwin Klein Kevin Elphinstone Verified Protection Model of the seL4 Microkernel 2007 submitted for publication http://ertos.org/publications/papers/Elkaduwe_GE_07.abstract ] This has led to what is referred to as third-generation microkernels, [ Gerwin Klein Elphinstone, Kevin; Heiser, Gernot; Andronick, June; Cock, David; Derrin, Philip; Elkaduwe, Dhammika; Engelhardt, Kai; Kolanski, Rafal; Norrish, Michael; Sewell, Thomas; Tuch, Harvey; Winwood, Simon seL4: Formal verification of an OS kernel 22nd ACM Symposium on Operating System Principles October 2009 Big Sky, MT, USA http://www.sigops.org/sosp/sosp09/papers/klein-sosp09.pdf ] characterised by a security-oriented API with resource access controlled by capabilities, virtualization as a first-class concern, novel approaches to kernel resource management, [ Dhammika Elkaduwe Derrin, Philip; Elphinstone, Kevin Kernel design for isolation and assurance of physical memory 1st Workshop on Isolation and Integration in Embedded Systems April 2008 Glasgow, UK 10.1145/1435458 http://ertos.nicta.com.au/publications/papers/Elkaduwe_DE_08.abstract ] and a design goal of suitability for formal analysis, besides the usual goal of high performance. Examples are Coyotos, seL4, Nova, [ http://www.inf.tu-dresden.de/index.php?node_id%3D2697 12 August 2010 TUD Home: Operating Systems: Research: Microkernel &amp; Hypervisor Faculty of Computer Science Technische Universität Dresden 5 November 2011 ] [ Udo Steinberg Bernhard Kauer NOVA: A Microhypervisor-Based Secure Virtualization Architecture Eurosys 2010 April 2010 Paris, France 209–222 http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1755913.1755935 ] and Fiasco.OC. [ Adam Lackorzynski Alexander Warg Taming Subsystems - Capabilities as Universal Resource Access Control in L4 IIES&apos;09: Second Workshop on Isolation and Integration in Embedded Systems March 2009 Nuremberg, Germany http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?id%3D1519135%26amp%3Bdl%3DACM ] In the case of seL4, complete formal verification of the implementation has been achieved, i.e. a mathematical proof that the kernel&apos;s implementation is consistent with its formal specification. This provides a guarantee that the properties proved about the API actually hold for the real kernel, a degree of assurance which goes beyond even CC EAL7. [ Nanokernel ] The term nanokernel or picokernel historically referred to: A kernel where the total amount of kernel code, i.e. code executing in the privileged mode of the hardware, is very small. The term picokernel was sometimes used to further emphasize small size. The term nanokernel was coined by Jonathan S. Shapiro in the paper &apos;&apos;The KeyKOS NanoKernel Architecture&apos;&apos;. It was a sardonic response to Mach, which claimed to be a microkernel while being monolithic, essentially unstructured, and slower than the systems it sought to replace. Subsequent reuse of and response to the term, including the picokernel coinage, suggest that the point was largely missed. Both nanokernel and picokernel have subsequently come to have the same meaning expressed by the term microkernel. A virtualization layer underneath an operating system; this is more correctly referred to as a hypervisor. A hardware abstraction layer that forms the lowest-level part of a kernel, sometimes used to provide real-time functionality to normal OS&apos;s, like Adeos. There is also at least one case where the term nanokernel is used to refer not to a small kernel, but one that supports a nanosecond clock resolution. { http://www.eecis.udel.edu/~mills/database/papers/nano/nano2.pdf } [ See also ] Exokernel, a research kernel architecture with a more minimalist approach to kernel technology. Hybrid kernel Monolithic kernel Loadable kernel module { Trusted computing base } [ References ] [ 30em ] [ Further reading ] [ Dan Hildebrand An Architectural Overview of QNX Proceedings of the Workshop on Micro-kernels and Other Kernel Architectures 1992 113–126 1-880446-42-1 ] [ Can We Make Operating Systems Reliable and Secure? Tanenbaum, A., Herder, J. and Bos, H. Computer May 2006 http://www.computer.org/portal/site/computer/menuitem.eb7d70008ce52e4b0ef1bd108bcd45f3/index.jsp?%26amp%3BpName%3Dcomputer_level1%26amp%3Bpath%3Dcomputer%2Fhomepage%2F0506%26amp%3Bfile%3Dcover1.xml%26amp%3Bxsl%3Darticle.xsl 44–51 10.1109/MC.2006.156 39 5 ] [ Microkernel Operating System Architecture and Mach Black, D.L., Golub, D.B., Julin, D.P., Rashid, R.F., Draves, R.P., Dean, R.W., Forin, A., Barrera, J., Tokuda, H., Malan, G., and Bohman, D. J. of Information Processing 14 March 1992 4 ] - the basic QNX reference. -the basic reliable reference. - the basic Mach reference. { MicroKernel page from the } { Portland Pattern Repository } { The } { Tanenbaum–Torvalds debate } The Tanenbaum-Torvalds Debate, 1992.01.29 Tanenbaum, A. S. &quot; Can We Make Operating Systems Reliable and Secure? &quot;. Torvalds, L. Linus Torvalds about the microkernels again, 2006.05.09 Shapiro, J. &quot; Debunking Linus&apos;s Latest &quot;. Tanenbaum, A. S. &quot; Tanenbaum-Torvalds Debate: Part II &quot;. [ August 2010 ] Category:Operating system technology Category:Microkernels bg:Микроядро ca:Microkernel cs:Mikrojádro de:Mikrokern es:Micronúcleo fa:ریزهسته fr:Noyau de système d&apos;exploitation#Systèmes à micro-noyaux ko:마이크로커널 id:Mikrokernel it:Kernel#Microkernel hu:Mikrokernel ml:മൈക്രോകേർണൽ nl:Microkernel ja:マイクロカーネル no:Mikrokjerne pl:Mikrojądro pt:Micronúcleo (informática) ru:Микроядро sk:Mikrokernel fi:Käyttöjärjestelmän ydin#Mikroydin sv:Mikrokärna uk:Мікроядро zh:微內核