[ the act of aggression Slap ] In music, the term slapping or popping is often used to refer to two different playing techniques used on the double bass and on the (electric) bass guitar. [ Double bass ] On double bass it refers to the technique that is a more vigorous version of pizzicato, where the string is plucked so hard that when released it bounces off the finger board, making a distinctive sound. A percussive sound is also made by smacking the strings with all four fingers on the right hand, usually in time with the snare drum. The earliest players of this technique in American music include Steve Brown, { Milton Brown and the Founding of Western Swing. Cary Ginell. 1994. University of Illinois Press. page 252. ISBN 0-252-02041-3 see also: The Jazz Book.Double Bass Hill. 1975. p 278-84; The Complete Encyclopedia of Popular Music and Jazz House. 1974. p 923-24 } Bill Johnson, Pops Foster, { Milton Brown and the Founding of Western Swing. Cary Ginell. 1994. University of Illinois Press. page 252. ISBN 0-252-02041-3 see also: The Jazz Book. Hill. 1975. p 278-84; The Complete Encyclopedia of Popular Music and Jazz House. 1974. p 923-24 } Wellman Braud, and Chester Zardis. Slapping the bass is a technique used by many bands since at least the 1920s; it came into popular use in the 1940s. Slap bass provides a strong downbeat when the string is plucked and a strong back beat when it slaps back onto the fingerboard of the bass. It creates a very percussive sound and adds a lot of drive that is particularly good for dance music. { text from Experience Music Project in Seattle, WA } Yet another explanation is that snapping the strings against the wood of the instrument supplies a crisp, intense sound which can supply the foundation of a dance band. Slap bass was used by Western Swing and Hillbilly Boogie musicians, and became an important component of an early form of rock and roll that combined blues and what was then called hillbilly music—a musical style now referred to as rockabilly. The technique inspired the George and Ira Gershwin song &quot; Slap That Bass &quot;. [ Bass guitar ] On bass guitar, &quot; slap bass &quot; usually refers to a percussive playing technique most commonly used in funk, disco, soul, jazz, Latin, pop, and many other genres. The style sounds much more percussive than regular fingering of notes with the plucking hand, and is also usually louder (although on an electric instrument, the volume can be adjusted with the volume knob or through compression) and more distinct than the sound of a bass guitar played with the usual plucking techniques. The slap sound comes from the combination of two elements: striking the string with the side of the bony joint in the middle of the thumb, a harder surface than the pads of the fingers (used in plucked fingering); and intentionally allowing the vibrating string to come into contact with the metal frets, producing a &quot; toney &quot; or buzzing sound that is normally avoided in plucked/fingered bass. In the slap technique, the bassist replaces the usual plucking motion of the index and middle fingers with &quot; slaps &quot; and &quot; pops &quot;. In the slap, the bassist uses the thumb to strike the strings (usually the lower E and A strings) near the base of the guitar&apos;s neck. In the pop, the bassist will use the index or middle finger of the plucking hand to snap the strings (usually the higher D and G strings) away from the body of the bass, causing them to bounce off the fretboard; this produces a prominent buzzing tone with a sharp attack and more high-frequency vibrations than present in plucked bass. The bassist can play many notes quickly by rotating the forearm, alternately slapping and popping: during the pop, the hand moves away from the fretboard, &quot; winding up &quot; or getting in position for the next slap. The slap and pop techniques are commonly used with pull-off s and hammer-on s with the fretting (usually left) hand, to further increase the rate at which notes may be played. Ghost note s, or notes played with the string damped, are also commonly played in slap bass to increase the percussive feel of the technique. The invention of slap on electric bass guitar is generally credited to funk bassists Larry Graham and Louis Johnson. { Bass Player magazine, Apr 07 } Graham has stated in several interviews that he was trying to emulate the sound of a drum set before his band had found its drummer. Graham himself refers to the technique as Thumpin&apos; and Pluckin&apos;. { Bass Player magazine, Apr 07 } Some prominent bass guitar players known for their use of slapping in their playing include Bootsy Collins (solo artist; Bootsy&apos;s Rubber Band, Funkadelic, Parliament, Praxis ), Flea ( Red Hot Chili Peppers ), Larry Graham ( Sly and the Family Stone, Graham Central Station ), Marcus Miller (solo artist, Miles Davis, David Sanborn, Luther Vandross ), Louis Johnson ( The Brothers Johnson, Quincy Jones, Michael Jackson ), Mark King ( Level 42 ), Mike Gordon ( Phish ), Les Claypool (solo artist, Primus ), Fieldy ( Korn ), Jayen Varma (solo artist), Tetsuya ( L&apos;Arc-en-Ciel ). For a longer list, see List of slap bass players (electric bass). [ Variants ] There are numerous variants of the slapping technique. Some bassists use other fingers of the strumming hand to achieve this sound, such as bassist Abraham Laboriel, Sr., who uses his thumb to pop the strings, and his other four fingers to slap the strings. Bassist Victor Wooten uses a double thump technique which is like a slap, but utilizes both sides of the thumb for all the strings, fast enough to produce the equivalent of a drumroll on the bass guitar. Funk fingers invented by progressive rock bass player Tony Levin create a similar sound by using a hard surface to strike the strings and intentionally cause string contact with the fretboard. Spank bass developed from the slap and pop style and treats the electric bass as a percussion instrument, striking the strings above the pickups with an open palmed hand. The slap technique bears some resemblance to tambour, a percussive technique used in flamenco and classical guitar, although the tonal quality produced in this technique is quite different from that of a slapped electric bass. [ Use in television and films ] The theme song for the television sitcom Seinfeld utilizes slap bass keyboard samples. A sample was also played in between scenes in each episode, often punctuating a scene or highlighting a punchline. The slap bass technique is used for the instrumental for theme song of the Nickelodeon show Kenan and Kel The 2008 film Forgetting Sarah Marshall parodies Seinfeld&apos;s usage when the main character Peter (played by Jason Segel ), who produces music for a TV series, inserts a goofy slap bass sample into a dramatic scene where &quot; dark and ominous &quot; music was needed. In television sitcom &quot; Everybody hates Chris &quot; a slap bass sample is used in between scenes in each episode, often punctuating a scene or highlighting a punchline. The theme song for the television sitcom ALF features a slap bass. In the popular British series The Mighty Boosh, the recurring character &quot; The Hitcher &quot; utilises his large thumb for playing slap bass. The 1990s sitcom Martin features slap bass riffs as well as many sitcoms of that period with soul, funk-oriented theme songs. A recurring joke in the 2009 film I Love You, Man is the main character&apos;s enthusiasm for slap bass. In the 2010 film &quot; Scott Pilgrim vs the World &quot; there is a scene where a short slap bass lick is used before the characters start talking, paroding Seinfeld&apos;s usage of slap samples. In the television show &quot; Metalocalypse &quot;, band member William Murderface sometimes utilizes his penis to perform slap bass solos. [ References ] [ External links ] [ slapping ] Slap Bass Audio &amp; Video Samples from FunkyChops Free Examples with Audio and TAB from Slap It! Free Slap Bass Video Tutorial Slap Lessons from BerkleeShares Music Man Stingray audio and photo Category:Musical performance techniques Category:Bass guitars be-x-old:Слэп ca:Slap cs:Slapping de:Slaptechnik es:Slap eo:Kordofrapado fr:Slap it:Slapping nl:Slapping bass ja:スラップ奏法 pl:Slapping pt:Slap ru:Слэп uk:Слеп