[ Eiland Goeree-Overflakkee LocatieGoereeOverflakkee.png Country Netherlands Province Zuid-Holland Municipality Goedereede Dirksland Middelharnis Oostflakkee Transport Major roads N215, N57 261.25 47.508 2005 182 0187 3240-3258 Groot-Rijnmond ] Satellite image of the Scheldt delta. The island of Goeree-Overflakkee (1) is only partly shown. Goedereede [ December 2011 ] Goeree-Overflakkee ( [ ɣu.ˈreɪ̯ ˈoʊ̯.vər.flɑ.ˌkeɪ̯ ] ) is the southernmost delta island of the province of South Holland, Netherlands. It is separated from Voorne-Putten and Hoeksche Waard by the Haringvliet, from the mainland of North Brabant by the Volkerak, and from Schouwen-Duiveland by Lake Grevelingen. From west to east, it consists of the municipalities Goedereede, Dirksland, Middelharnis, Oostflakkee. Despite being part of South Holland Province, the island&apos;s scenery and dialect is closer related to Zeeland than to Holland. [ Goedereede ] This municipality consists of a number of towns. From west to east, they are Ouddorp (with Oostdijk ), Goedereede (with Havenhoofd ) and Stellendam. Income consists mainly of tourism and fishery. Because of the extended and beautiful beach close by Ouddorp has a large number of camping grounds which is a big attraction for other inland Europeans, mainly Germans. Goedereede and Stellendam both have an extended fishing fleet.Entering the town of Goedereede is like entering a different time. A town that takes you back a few centuries with its beautifully shaped buildings and tall church tower. Goedereede is one of two towns on the island that ever obtained city rights.Stellendam was hit hard in the 1953 storm flood and several monuments in the town commemorate this tragic event. Next to Stellendam lies the Haringvlietdam which shelters the Haringvliet from the North Sea, this dam is part of the Delta Project. On the island&apos;s side of the dam a &apos;Delta Expo&apos; can be found with informative tours that guide you through the dam. [ Dirksland ] Dirksland Consisting of Melissant, Herkingen and Dirksland. The 1953 flood did not have such an enormous effect on these towns, because the lands they are on, lay generally higher than the rest of the island. Dirksland is the biggest of the three and also has the only hospital on the island. The Van Weel-Bethesda hospital is one the smallest in the country, but has an excellent reputation, coming out very high in national hospital grade polls. Dirksland is recognizable from a distance by the biggest watertower of the country! The towns are agriculturally focused and have several campgrounds for people who prefer a bit of rest over the busy Ouddorp area, but still want to be close to shore. Dirksland has an inland harbor with a newly restored gatecomplex. Herkingen lies on the south side of the island and borders the Grevelingenmeer. A saltwater lake that has been disconnected directly from the North Sea by the Brouwersdam, but still connects to the Oosterschelde which is saltwater. The Grevelingenmeer is a large watersports area with the main recreational areas on Schouwen-Duiveland. Herkingen is trying to join in with the tourism and has quite a large size yachting harbor. The town of Herkingen currently hosts several of the biggest modern windmills in the country. [ Middelharnis ] Middelharnis Forming the center of the island, this municipality is the biggest of the 4 with over 17,000 inhabitants. Sommelsdijk, Middelharnis, Nieuwe Tonge and Stad aan &apos;t Haringvliet are the towns that form this municipality. Middelharnis has a shopping area called D&apos;n Diek. This shopping center settled itself on a dike which used to be the last barrier for the towns from the Haringvliet. Now extensive this dike and the area is enjoying a huge face lift. On Fridays in the summer months, there are what is called the Diekdagen (Diekdays in Dutch). These days there are special activities like sports car racing and bicycle racing in the middle of the town. The town hosts a public and Christian high school. Middelharnis has an inland harbor with connection to the Haringvliet. There is also a small beach which can get very crowded in the summertime. The old main street in both towns are very pretty. Starting at the church and ending at the harbor in both towns, they are very identical. In Middelharnis the old main street has the old municipality building. Both towns have the church in the center and the rest of the towns sort of vane out from this center. In Sommelsdijk a sportcomplex with swimming pool is present called De Staver.Stad aan &apos;t Haringvliet has a small harbor with beach. Like most of the towns on the island the old windmill has been preserved. Nieuwe Tonge&apos;s main entry roads are the two dikes that form the edges of the town. And of course a traditional windmill is present. [ Oostflakkee ] Oostflakkee Oostflakkee consists of the following towns Den Bommel (with Zuidzijde), Oude Tonge, Ooltgensplaat, Achthuizen and Langstraat. Oude Tonge is the main town of this municipality with a considerable industrial area. It also has a large busstation. Oude Tonge suffered most in 1953 flood and was visited by the queen in 2003 to commemorate the 50 year anniversary of this event. Den Bommel is quite similar to Stad aan &apos;t Haringvliet with a harbor and beach on the shores of the Haringvliet. A few kilometres east of Den Bommel there is Zuidzijde, a very small town with a neat looking water tower. Ooltgensplaat is the most eastward town on the island with a harbor on the Volkerak. The town has a very old and beautiful municipal building. This town has the yearly start and finish of De Omloop - a 100+ km walk around the island within a 24 hour period. This event attracts thousands every year either participants or those to watch the spectacle. It is held yearly in the latter half of August. Achthuizen and Langstraat are other small towns nearby Ooltgensplaat. [ Gorée in Senegal ] The island of Gorée in Senegal, notorious in the 18th Century as a center for the slave trade, got its name from the Dutch Goeree at the time when it was ruled by the Netherlands (from 1588 to 1664). [ 51.75 4.12 title dms ] Category:Islands of the Netherlands Category:Regions of the Netherlands Category:Rhine–Meuse–Scheldt delta Category:South Holland de:Goeree-Overflakkee es:Goeree-Overflakkee fr:Goeree-Overflakkee nl:Goeree-Overflakkee nn:Goeree-Overflakkee pt:Goeree-Overflakkee ru:Гуре-Оверфлакке zea:Goereê-Overflakkeê