[ Cuckoo&apos;s nest ] [ Cuckoos Guira guira.jpg 240px Guira Cuckoo (Guira guira) Animal ia Chordata Aves Cuculiformes Cuculidae Vigors, 1825 Genera Around 26, see text. ] The cuckoos are a family, Cuculidae, of near passerine bird s. The order Cuculiformes, in addition to the cuckoos, also includes the turaco s (family Musophagidae, sometimes treated as a separate order, Musophagiformes). Some zoologists and taxonomists have also included the unique Hoatzin in the Cuculiformes, but its taxonomy remains in dispute. The cuckoo family, in addition to those species named as such, also includes the roadrunner s, koel s, malkoha s, coua s, coucal s and anis. The coucals and anis are sometimes separated as distinct families, the Centropodidae and Crotophagidae respectively. The cuckoos are generally medium sized slender birds. The majority are arboreal, with a sizeable minority that are terrestrial. The family has a cosmopolitan distribution, with the majority of species being tropical. The temperate species are migratory. The cuckoos feed on insects, insect larvae and a variety of other animals, as well as fruit. Many species are brood parasite s, laying their eggs in the nests of other species, but the majority of species raise their own young. [ Morphology ] { Chestnut-breasted Malkoha is typical of the Phaenicophaeinae in having brightly coloured skin around the eye. } Cuckoos are medium sized birds that range in size from the Little Bronze Cuckoo, at 17 g and 15  cm (6  inches), to the Channel-billed Cuckoo, at 630 g (1.4  lbs) and 63  cm (25  inches). { Payne R.B. (1997) &quot; Family Cuculidae (Cuckoos) &quot;, pp. 508–45 in del Hoyo J, Elliott A, Sargatal J (eds) (1997). } { Handbook of the Birds of the World Volume 4; Sandgrouse to Cuckoos Lynx Edicions:Barcelona. ISBN 84-87334-22-9 } There is generally little sexual dimorphism in size, but where it exists, it can be either the male or the female that is larger. One of the most important distinguishing features of the family are the feet, which are zygodactyl, meaning that the two inner toes point forward and the two outer backward. There are two basic body forms, arboreal species (like the Common Cuckoo ) which are slender and have short tarsi, and terrestrial species (like the roadrunners ) which are more heavy set and have long tarsi. Almost all species have long tails which are used for steering in terrestrial species and as a rudder during flight in the arboreal species. The wing shape also varies with lifestyle, with the more migratory species like the Black-billed Cuckoo possessing long narrow wings capable of strong direct flight, and the more terrestrial and sedentary cuckoos like the coucal s and malkoha s having shorter rounded wings and a more laboured gliding flight. The subfamily Cuculinae are the brood-parasitic cuckoos of the Old World. They tend to conform to the classic shape, with (usually) long tails, short legs, long narrow wings and an arboreal lifestyle. The largest species, the Channel-billed Cuckoo, also has the most outsized bill in the family, resembling that of a hornbill. The subfamily Phaenicophaeinae are the non-parasitic cuckoos of the Old World, and include the couas, malkohas, and ground-cuckoos. They are more terrestrial cuckoos, with strong and often long legs and short rounded wings. The subfamily typically has brighter plumage and brightly coloured bare skin around the eye. The coucal s are another terrestrial subfamily of long tailed long legged and short winged cuckoos. They are large heavyset birds with the largest, the Greater Black Coucal, being around the same size as the Channel-billed Cuckoo. The subfamily Coccyzinae are arboreal and long tailed as well, with a number of large insular forms. The New World ground cuckoos are similar to the Asian ground-cuckoos in being long legged and terrestrial, and includes the long billed roadrunner, which can reach speeds of 30  km/h when chasing prey. The final subfamily are the atypical anis, which include the small clumsy anis and the larger Guira Cuckoo. The anis have massive bills and smooth glossy feathers. { Asian Emerald Cuckoo (&apos;&apos;Chrysococcyx maculatus&apos;&apos;) exhibits } { iridescent plumage. } The feather s of the cuckoos are generally soft, and often become waterlogged in heavy rain. Cuckoos will often sun themselves after rain, and the anis will hold their wings open in the manner of a vulture or cormorant while drying. There is considerable variation in the plumage exhibited by the family. Some species, particularly the brood parasite s have cryptic plumage, whereas others have bright and elaborate plumage. This is particularly true of the Chrysococcyx or glossy cuckoos, which have iridescent plumage. Some cuckoos have a resemblance to hawks with barring on the underside; this apparently alarms potential hosts, allowing the female to access a host nest. [ Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences Cuckoo–hawk mimicry? An experimental test 275 1644 1817–22 2008 Davies, NB &amp; JA Welbergen 10.1098/rspb.2008.0331 18467298 2587796 ] The young of some brood parasites are coloured so as to resemble the young of the host. For example, the Asian Koel s breeding in India have black offspring to resemble their crow hosts, whereas in the Australian Koel s the chicks are brown like the honeyeater hosts. Sexual dimorphism in plumage is uncommon in the cuckoos, being most common in the parasitic Old World species. Cuckoo genera differ in the number of primary wing feathers as below. Coccycua, Coccyzus, Phaenicophaeus, Piaya – 9 Cuculus – 9 or 10 Pachycoccyx, Clamator levaillantii, Centropus – 10 Microdynamis, Eudynamys, Clamator glandarius – 11 Some coucal s – 12 Scythrops novaehollandiae – 13 [ Distribution and habitat ] { Great Lizard Cuckoo is a large insular cuckoo of the Caribbean } The cuckoos have a cosmopolitan distribution, ranging across all the world&apos;s continents except Antarctica. They are absent from the south west of South America, the far north and north west of North America, and the driest areas of the Middle East and North Africa (although they occur there as passage migrants ). They generally only occur as vagrants in the oceanic islands of the Atlantic and Indian Ocean s, but one species breeds on a number of Pacific islands and another is a winter migrant across much of the Pacific. { Bogert, C (1937) Birds collected during the Whitney South Sea Expedition. 34, The distribution and the migration of the long-tailed cuckoo (&apos;&apos;Urodynamis taitensis&apos;&apos; Sparrman). American Museum novitates 933 12 p. } The Cuculinae is the most widespread subfamily of cuckoos, and is distributed across Europe, Asia, Africa, Australia and Oceania. Amongst the Phaenicophaeinae cuckoos the malkohas and Asian ground-cuckoos are restricted to southern Asia, the couas are endemic to Madagascar and the Yellowbill widespread across Africa. The coucals are distributed from Africa through tropical Asia down into Australia and the Solomon Islands. The remaining three subfamilies have a New World distribution, all three are found in both North and South America. The Coccyzinae reaches the furthest north of the three subfamilies, breeding in Canada, whereas the anis reach as far north as Florida and the typical ground-cuckoos the south west United States. For the cuckoos suitable habitat provides a source of food (principally insects and especially caterpillars) and a place to breed, for brood parasite s the need is for suitable habitat for the host species. Cuckoos occur in a wide variety of habitat s. The majority of species occur in forests and woodland, principally in the evergreen rainforests of the tropics. Some species inhabit or are even restricted to mangrove forests; these include the Little Bronze Cuckoo of Australia, some malkohas, coucals, and the aptly named mangrove Cuckoo of the New World. In addition to forests come species of cuckoo occupy more open environments; this can include even arid areas like deserts in the case of the Greater Roadrunner or the Pallid Cuckoo. Temperate migratory species like the Common Cuckoo inhabit a wide range of habitats in order to make maximum use of the potential brood hosts, from reed beds (where they parasitise Reed Warbler s ) to treeless moors (where they parasitise Meadow Pipit s ). [ Migration ] Most species of cuckoo are sedentary, but some undertake regular seasonal migrations and others undertake partial migrations over part of their range. The migration is Diurnal, as in the Channel-billed Cuckoo, or nocturnal, as in the Yellow-billed Cuckoo. For species breeding at higher latitudes, food availability means that they migrate to warmer climates during the winter, and all do so. The Long-tailed Koel, which breeds in New Zealand, flies to its wintering grounds in Polynesia, Micronesia, and Melanesia, a feat described as &quot; perhaps the most remarkable overwater migration of any land bird. &quot; { Ellis, D; Kepler, C; Kepler, A &amp; K Teebaki (1990) &quot; Occurrence of the Longtailed Cuckoo &apos;&apos;Eudynamis taitensis&apos;&apos; on Caroline Atoll, Kiribati &quot;. Emu 90 (3): 202 } The Yellow-billed Cuckoo and Black-billed Cuckoo breed in North America and fly across the Caribbean Sea, a non-stop flight of 4000  km. Other long migration flights include the Lesser Cuckoo, which flies from Africa to India, and the Common Cuckoo s of Europe, which fly non-stop over the Mediterranean Sea and Sahara Desert on their voyage to central Africa. { BTO Cuckoo migration tracking study } Within Africa 10 species make regular intra-continental migrations that are described as polarised, that is they spend the non-breeding season in the tropical centre of the continent and move north and south to breed in the more arid and open savannah and deserts. { Hockey, P (2000) &quot; Patterns and Correlates of Bird Migrations in Sub-Saharan Africa &quot; Emu 100 (5): 401–17 } [ 10.1071/MU0006S ] This is the same as the situation in the Neotropics, where no species have this migration pattern, or tropical Asia, where a single species does. 83% of the Australian species are partial migrants within Australia or travel to New Guinea and Indonesia after the breeding season. { Chan, K (2001) &quot; Partial migration in Australian landbirds: a review &quot;. Emu 101(4): 281–92 } [ 10.1071/MU00034 ] [ Behaviour ] The cuckoos are for the most part solitary birds that seldom occur in pairs or groups. The biggest exception to this are the anis of the Americas which have evolved cooperative breeding and other social behaviours. For the most part the cuckoos are also diurnal as opposed to nocturnal, but many species will call at night (see below). The cuckoos are also generally a shy and retiring family, more often heard than seen. The exception to this are again the anis, which are often extremely confiding towards humans and other species. [ Feeding ] { Asian Koel is mostly } { frugivorous. } Most cuckoos are insectivorous, and in particular are specialised in eating larger insects and caterpillar s, including noxious hairy types avoided by other birds. They are unusual among birds in processing their prey prior to swallowing, rubbing it back and forth on hard objects such as branches and then crushing it with special bony plates in the back of the mouth. { Kaiser, G.W. (2007) The Inner Bird; Anatomy and Evolution. UBC Press. Vancouver. ISBN 978-0-7748-1343-3 } They will also take a wide range of other insects and animal prey. The lizard-cuckoo s of the Caribbean have, in the relative absence of birds of prey, specialised in taking lizards. Larger, ground types such as coucals and roadrunners also feed variously on snakes, lizards, small rodents, and other birds, which they bludgeon with their strong bills. Ground species may employ different techniques to catch prey. A study of two coua species in Madagascar found that the Coquerel&apos;s Coua obtained prey by walking and gleaning on the forest floor, whereas the Red-capped Coua ran and pounced on prey. Both species also showed seasonal flexibility in prey and foraging techniques. [ Chouteau Philippe Raymond Fenosoa 2008 Seasonal effects on foraging behaviour of two sympatric species of couas in the western dry forest of Madagascar African Journal of Ecology 46 3 248–57 10.1111/j.1365-2028.2007.00880.x ] The parasitic cuckoos are generally not recorded as participating in mixed-species feeding flock s, although some studies in eastern Australia found several species would participate in the non-breeding season, but were mobbed and unable to do so in the breeding season. { Bell, H (1986) &quot; The Participation by Cuckoos in Mixed-Species Flocks of Insectivorous Birds in South-eastern Australia &quot; Emu 86 (4): 249–53 } [ 10.1071/MU9860249b ] Ground-cuckoos of the genus Neomorphus are sometimes seen feeding in association with army ant swarms, although they are not obligate ant-follower s as are some antbird s. { Karubian, J &amp; L Carrasco (2008) &quot; Home Range and Habitat Preferences of the Banded Ground-cuckoo (Neomorphus radiolosus) &quot; The Wilson Journal of Ornithology 120 (1): 205–9. } The anis are ground feeders that follow cattle and other large mammals when foraging; in a similar fashion to Cattle Egret s they snatch prey flushed by the cattle and enjoy higher foraging success rates in this way. { Smith, S (1971) &quot; The Relationship of Grazing Cattle to Foraging Rates in Anis. &quot; The Auk 88 (4): 876–80 } Several koel s, coua s, and the Channel-billed Cuckoo feed mainly on fruit, { Corlett R &amp; Ping I (1995) &quot; Frugivory by koels in Hong Kong &quot; Memoirs of the Hong Kong Natural History Society 20 221–22 } but they are not exclusively frugivore s. The parasitic koels and Channel-billed Cuckoo in particular consume mainly fruit when raised by frugivore hosts such as the Australasian Figbird and Pied Currawong. Other species will occasionally take fruit as well. Couas consume fruit in the dry season when prey is harder to find. [ Breeding ] The cuckoos are an extremely diverse group of birds with regards to breeding systems. The majority of species are monogamous, but there are exceptions. The anis and the Guira Cuckoo lay their eggs in communal nests, although this behaviour is not completely cooperative; a female may remove others&apos; eggs when laying hers. [ Payne Robert B. The Cuckoos 2005 Oxford University Press http://books.google.com/?id%3DiWihwHTIEW0C 2007-12-19 0-19-850213-3 ] Polyandry has been confirmed in the African Black Coucal and is suspected to occur in the other coucals, perhaps explaining the reversed sexual dimorphism in the group. { Goymann, W; Wittenzellner, A &amp; J Wingfield (2004) &quot; Competing Females and Caring Males. Polyandry and Sex-Role Reversal in African Black Coucals, Centropus grillii &quot;. Ethology 110 (10): 807–23 } [ 10.1111/j.1439-0310.2004.01015.x ] The majority of cuckoo species, including malkohas, couas, coucals, and roadrunners and most other American cuckoos, build their own nests, although a large minority engage in brood parasitism (see below). Most of these species nest in trees or bushes, but the coucals lay their eggs in nests on the ground or in low shrubs. Though on some occasions non-parasitic cuckoos parasitize other species, the parent still helps feed the chick. Non-parasitic cuckoos, like most other non-passerines, lay white eggs, but many of the parasitic species lay coloured eggs to match those of their passerine hosts. The young of all species are altricial. Non-parasitic cuckoos leave the nest before they can fly, and some New World species have the shortest incubation periods among birds. [ Brood parasitism ] [ Brood parasite ] { Reed Warbler is raising the young of a } { Common Cuckoo. } Shows individual Pallid Cuckoo Juvenile being fed by 3 separate foster-parent species About 56 of the Old World species and 3 of the New World species are brood parasite s, laying their egg s in the nests of other birds. These species are obligate brood parasites, meaning that they only reproduce in this fashion. In addition to the above noted species, yet others sometimes engage in non-obligate brood parasitism, laying their eggs in the nests of members of their own species in addition to raising their own young. The best-known example is the European Common Cuckoo. The shells of the eggs of brood-parasites is usually thick. { Anton Antonov, Bard G. Stokke, Arne Moksnes &amp; Eivin Roeskaft (2008) Does the cuckoo benefit from laying unusually strong eggs? Animal Behaviour 76:1893–900 } They have two distinct layers with an outer chalky layer that is believed to provide resistance to cracking when the eggs are dropped in the host nest. { Robert B. Payne, Michael D. Sorenson, Karen Klitz (2005) The Cuckoos: Cuculidae. Oxford University Press. p. 127 } The cuckoo egg hatches earlier than the host&apos;s, and the cuckoo chick grows faster; in most cases the chick evicts the eggs or young of the host species. The chick has no time to learn this behavior, so it must be an instinct passed on genetically. The chick encourages the host to keep pace with its high growth rate with its rapid begging call [ http://www.telegraph.co.uk/earth/wildlife/4109282/Cuckoo-chicks-dupe-foster-parents-from-the-moment-they-hatch.html The Daily Telegraph London Cuckoo chicks dupe foster parents from the moment they hatch Cuckoo chicks start to mimic the cries that their foster parents&apos; young make from the moment they hatch, a scientist has proved. Stephen Adams 2009-01-04 2010-04-30 ] and the chick&apos;s open mouth which serves as a sign stimulus. { Biology (4th edition) NA Campbell, p. 117 &apos;Fixed Action Patterns&apos; (Benjamin Cummings NY, 1996) ISBN 0-8053-1957-3 } Cuckoos have evolved various strategies for getting their egg into a host nest. Different species use different strategies based on host defensive strategies. Female cuckoos have evolved secretive and fast laying behaviors, but in some cases, males have been shown to lure host adults away from their nests so that the female can lay her egg in the nest. [ Davies N.B. Cuckoo adaptations: trickery and tuning Journal of Zoology 8 2011 March 284 1–14 14 November 2011 ] Some species of cuckoo Host species may try directly preventing cuckoos laying eggs in their nest in the first place – birds whose nests are at high risk of cuckoo-contamination are known to mob cuckoos to drive them out of the area. [ 10.1016/j.cub.2008.12.034 ] Parasitic cuckoos are grouped into gentes, with each gens specializing in a particular host. There is some evidence that the gentes are genetically different from one another. Female parasitic cuckoos sometimes specialize and lay eggs that closely resemble the eggs of their chosen host. This has been produced by natural selection, as some birds are able to distinguish cuckoo eggs from their own, leading to those eggs least like the host&apos;s being thrown out of the nest. Parasitic cuckoos that show the highest levels of egg mimicry are those whose hosts exhibit high levels of egg rejection behavior. [ Stoddard Mary Stevens, M. Avian vision and the evolution of egg color mimicry in the common cuckoo Evolution 28 2011 January 65 2004–2013 14 November 2011 ] Some hosts do not exhibit egg rejection behavior and the cuckoo eggs look very dissimilar from the host eggs. It has also been shown in a study of the European cuckoos that females will lay their egg in the nest of a host that has eggs that look similar to its own. [ Aviles J. Rapid increase in cuckoo egg matching in a recently parasitized reed warbler population European Society for Evolutionary Biology 2006 1901–1910 14 November 2011 ] Other species of cuckoo lay &quot; cryptic &quot; eggs, which are dark in color when their hosts&apos; eggs are light. This is a trick to hide the egg from the host, and has evolved in cuckoos that parasitize hosts with dark, domed nests. Some parasitic cuckoos have been shown to exhibit &quot; Mafia-like &quot; enforcement, in which adult cuckoos will completely destroy the host&apos;s clutch if they reject the cuckoo egg. In this case, raising the cuckoo chick is less of a cost than the alternative—total clutch destruction. [ Calls ] { Brush Cuckoo } Cuckoos are often highly secretive and in many cases best known for their wide repertoire of calls. Calls are usually relatively simple, resembling whistles, flutes, or hiccups. [ Brooke Michael de L Horsfall, John A. 2003 Firefly Encyclopedia of Birds Cuckoos Christopher Perrins (Ed.) 312–15 Firefly Books 1-55297-777-3 ] The calls are used in order to demonstrate ownership of a territory and to attract a mate. Within a species the calls are remarkably consistent across the range, even in species with very large ranges. This suggests, along with the fact that many species are not raised by their true parents, that the calls of cuckoos are innate and not learnt. Although cuckoos are diurnal, many species call at night. The cuckoo family gets its English and scientific names from the call of the Common Cuckoo, which is also familiar from cuckoo clock s. Some of the names of other species and genera are also derived from their calls, for example the koel s of Asia and Australasia. In most cuckoos the calls are distinctive to particular species, and are useful for identification. Several cryptic species are best identified on the basis of their calls. [ Systematics ] Family Cuculidae Genus Dynamopterus ( fossil : Late Eocene / Early Oligocene of Caylus, Tarn-et-Garonne, France) Genus Cursoricoccyx ( fossil : Early Miocene of Logan County, USA) – Neomorphinae? Cuculidae gen. et sp. indet. ( fossil : Early Pliocene of Lee Creek Mine, USA. Genus Nannococcyx – Saint Helena Cuckoo ( extinct ) { Subfamily } { Cuculinae – Brood-parasitic cuckoos } Genus Eocuculus ( fossil : Late Eocene of Teller County, USA). Genus Clamator (4 species) Genus Pachycoccyx – Thick-billed Cuckoo Genus Cuculus – typical cuckoos (some 15 species) Genus Cercococcyx – long-tailed cuckoos (3 species) Genus Cacomantis (8 species) Genus Chrysococcyx – bronze cuckoos (12 species) Genus Rhamphomantis – Long-billed Cuckoo Genus Surniculus – drongo-cuckoos (2 species) Genus Caliechthrus – White-crowned Koel Genus Microdynamis – Dwarf Koel Genus Eudynamys – typical koels (2–5 species, one prehistoric). Genus Scythrops – Channel-billed Cuckoo { Subfamily } { Phaenicophaeinae – Malkohas and couas } Genus Ceuthmochares – Yellowbill Genus Phaenicophaeus – malkohas (12 species) Genus Carpococcyx – Asian ground-cuckoos (3 species) Genus Coua – couas (9 living species, 1 recently extinct ) { Subfamily } { Coccyzinae } {. } { – American cuckoos } Genus Coccyzus – includes Saurothera and Hyetornis (13 species) Genus Coccycua – formerly in Coccyzus and Piaya, includes Micrococcyx (3 species) Genus Piaya (2 species) { Subfamily } { Neomorphinae – New World ground cuckoos } Genus Neococcyx ( fossil : Early Oligocene of Central North America) Genus Tapera – Striped Cuckoo Genus Dromococcyx (2 species) Genus Morococcyx – Lesser Ground Cuckoo Genus Geococcyx – roadrunners (2 species) Genus Neomorphus – Neotropical ground-cuckoos (5 species) { Subfamily } { Centropodinae – Coucals } Genus Centropus (some 30 species) { Subfamily } { Crotophaginae – Anis } Genus Crotophaga – true anis (3 species) Genus Guira – Guira Cuckoo [ References ] [ 2 ] [ Other sources ] Feduccia, Alan (1996): The Origin and Evolution of Birds. Yale University Press, New Haven. ISBN 0-300-06460-8 Olson, Storrs L. (1985): Section VII.C. Cuculidae. In: Farner, D.S.; King, J.R. &amp; Parkes, Kenneth C. (eds.): Avian Biology 8: 110-111. Academic Press, New York. [ External links ] [ Cuculidae ] [ The Origin of Species/Chapter VIII The Origin of Species: Instincts of the Cuckoo ] [ Cuckoos ] [ cuckoo ] Cuckoo sounds on xeno-canto.org Cuckoo videos on the Internet Bird Collection * Category:Onomatopoeias kbd:КӀыгуугу лъэпкъыр ar:وقواق bn:কোকিল be-x-old:Зязюлевыя br:Cuculidae bxr:Хүхы ca:Cucúlid cv:Куккук евĕрлисем cs:Kukačkovití de:Kuckucke et:Kägulased es:Cuculidae eo:Kukoledoj fa:کوکو (پرنده) fr:Cuculidae ga:Cuach ko:뻐꾸기과 hr:Prave kukavice it:Cuculidae he:קוקייתיים kn:ಕೋಗಿಲೆ ks:کُکِل sw:Kekeo lt:Gegutiniai hu:Kakukkfélék mdf:Куку my:မိုးဆောင်းငှက် nl:Koekoeken ja:カッコウ科 no:Gjøkfamilien nn:Gaukefamilien pl:Kukułkowate pt:Cuculidae ru:Кукушковые sr:Кукавица sh:Kukavica (ptica) su:Incuing fi:Käet sv:Gökar tl:Kakok tr:Gugukgiller uk:Зозулеві vi:Họ Cu cu diq:Phepug zh:杜鹃科