[ the 1648 English parliament the 1849 German parliament Frankfurt Parliament#Rump parliament and dissolution ] The Rump Parliament is the name of the English Parliament after Colonel Pride purged the Long Parliament on 6 December 1648 of those members hostile to the Grandees&apos; intention to try King Charles I for high treason. &quot; Rump &quot; normally means the hind end of an animal; its use meaning &quot; remnant &quot; was first recorded in the above context. Since 1649, the term &quot; rump parliament &quot; has been used to refer to any parliament left over from the actual legitimate parliament. [ Treaty of Newport ] In September 1648, at the end of the Second English Civil War, the Long Parliament was concerned with the increasing radicalism in the New Model Army. The Long Parliament began negotiations with King Charles I. The members wanted to restore the king to power but wanted to limit the authority he had. Charles I conceded militia power among other things but he later admitted, “it was only so he could escape.” [ The Oxford Companion to British History. 2nd Newport Treaty ] In November the negotiations began to fall through and the New Model Army seized power. Charles I was then taken into the Army’s custody to await trial for treason. [ Pride&apos;s Purge ] The New Model Army wanted to prevent the Treaty of Newport from reinstating King Charles I. Thomas Fairfax organized a military coup in 1648 by issuing a command to Commissary General Ireton. Ireton intended to only dissolve the Long Parliament; however, he was persuaded to purge it instead. He then ordered Colonel Thomas Pride to stop the signing of the Treaty of Newport. Pride prevented 231 known supporters of the treaty from entering the House and imprisoned 45 of them. The remaining free members then became The Rump Parliament. [ The Oxford Companion to British History. 2 Pride&apos;s Purge ] [ Execution of Charles I and the abolition of the Monarchy ] When it became apparent to the leaders of the New Model Army that the Parliament —then controlled by the Presbyterian faction —was ready to come to an agreement with the King that would restore him to his throne (though without effective power) and negate the power of the Army, they resolved to shatter the power of both King and Parliament. Pride&apos;s Purge brought the Parliament to heel, under the direct control of the Army; the remaining Commons (the Rump) then on 13 December 1648 broke off negotiations with the King. Two days later, the Council of Officers of the New Model Army voted that the King be moved from the Isle of Wight, where he was prisoner, to Windsor &quot;...in order to the bringing of him speedily to justice &quot;. In the middle of December the King was moved from Windsor to London. On 4 January 1649, the Commons passed an ordinance to set up a High Court of Justice to try Charles I for high treason in the name of the people of England. The Lords rejected it, and as it did not receive Royal Assent, Charles asked at the start of his trial on 20 January in Westminster Hall &quot; I would know by what power I am called hither. I would know by what authority, I mean lawful authority &quot;, to which there was no strong legal answer under the constitutional arrangements of the time. He was convicted with fifty-nine Commissioners (Judges) signing the death warrant. The execution of Charles I was delayed to 30 January, so that the House of Commons could pass an emergency act, the &quot; Act prohibiting the proclaiming any person to be King of England or Ireland, or the Dominions thereof &quot;, that made it an offence to proclaim a new King, and to declare the representatives of the people, the House of Commons, as the source of all just power. Parliament voted to abolish the House of Lords on 6 February and to abolish the monarchy on 7 February; an act abolishing the kingship was formally passed by Parliament on 17 March, followed by an act to abolish the House of Lords on 19 March. [ Worden Blair The Rump Parliament 1648–1653 Cambridge University Press 1974 171–172 978-0-521-29213-9 ] The establishment of a Council of State was approved on 14 February and on 19 May an Act Declaring England a Commonwealth was passed. It became treason to say that the House of Commons (without the Lords or the King) was not the supreme authority of the land. { Treasons Act 1649 } [ Rump Parliament&apos;s membership, attendance, and allegiances ] [ April 2011 ] Although an exact number hasn&apos;t been pinned down, it is estimated that there were about 210 members of the Rump Parliament. This was approximately a fifty percent decrease from the 470 member enrollment of the Long Parliament before the Purge. Though nine new members were admitted to the Rump parliament, the vast majority of the Rumpers were transferred from the long parliament. Most Rumpers still regarded many purged colleagues as “members of parliament” and remained hopeful that the excluded members would be readmitted. “The Rump did not think of itself as a corporate political entity distinct in membership, aims and character from the long parliament”. { Worden, p. 25 } Despite the rump’s lack of distinctiveness, there were a variety of reasons why people wanted to be a part of the Rump Parliament. Some members stayed in the Rump Parliament because they genuinely supported revolutionary changes, while others were only there for financial advantage, civilian power, or to satisfy their relish for political activity. Because of the varied energies within the Rump, the parliament divided into two categories, front benchers and back benchers, meaning, those who attended parliament regularly and those who did not. Only about one third of the Rump Parliament became front benchers who were consistently present and engaged in their parliamentary position. The other two thirds were back benchers, or essentially, part timers who had inconsistent attendance. Within the active third of the rump, there were many family allegiances, local allegiances and most importantly, common interest groups. The majority of active rumpers could fit into one of the two common interest categories: Members of Parliament who were professional lawyers and cooperated to oppose the reformation of the English Legal System. Some of the best known lawyer allies were Bulstrode Whitelocke and Sir Thomas Widdrington, and Nicholas Lechmere and Lisliborne Long. Members who were particularly concerned with commercial matters and politics in the city of London. Three remarkable pairs of allies in this category are Jon Venn and Miles Corbet, Isaac Pennington and Thomas Atkin, and Frances Allen and Richard Salwey. Although lawyers and merchants were a minority compared to the large number of rural land lords that occupied the Rump Parliament, their interest groups’ energy and cohesiveness was able largely influence Rump politics. [ Political changes that the Rump Parliament made during the Commonwealth of England ] During the time of the Commonwealth of England (1649–1653), the Rump passed a number of acts in the areas of religion, law, and finance. Most of the members of the Rump wanted to promote &quot; godliness &quot;, but also to restrict the more extreme puritan sects like the Quakers and the Ranters. An Adultery Act of May 1650 imposed the death penalty for incest and adultery and three months imprisonment for fornication; { J.P. Kenyon &quot; The Interregnum, 1649–1660 &quot; in J.P. Kenyon The Stuart Constitution (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1969) page 330 } the Blasphemy Act of August 1650 was aimed at curbing extreme religious &quot; enthusiasm &quot;. To stop extreme evangelicals from preaching, they formed a Committee for the Propagation of the Gospel, which issued licenses to preach. To allow Puritans freedom of worship, they repealed the Elizabethan requirement of compulsory attendance at an Anglican Church. As lawyers were overrepresented in the Rump Parliament, the Rump did not respond to the popular requests made by the Levellers to change the expensive legal system. The Rump raised revenue through the sale of Crown lands and Church property, both of which were popular. However, revenue raised through excise levies and through an Assessment Tax on land were unpopular as they affected everyone who owned property. The proceeds from confiscated Royalist estates were a valuable source of income, but it was a two edged sword. It ingratiated Parliament to people like John Downes who were making a fortune from the business but it did nothing to heal the wounds of the Civil War. [ Oliver Cromwell ] In 1653, after learning that Parliament was attempting to stay in session despite an agreement to dissolve, and having failed to come up with a working constitution, Cromwell ’s patience ran out. On 20 April he attended a sitting of Parliament and listened to one or two speeches. Then he stood up and harangued the members of the Rump. This speech does not survive but has often been paraphrased, for instance in the Book of Days: You have sat too long for any good you have been doing lately... Depart, I say; and let us have done with you. In the name of God, go! He then declared &quot; you are no Parliament &quot; and called in a troop of soldiers, under the command of Major-General Thomas Harrison, ordering them to clear the chamber. According to Dickens { A Child&apos;s History Of England } and Belloc, { The History Of England } he then turned to the Speaker&apos;s Mace, the symbol of Parliamentary power, declared it a &quot; fool&apos;s bauble &quot;, and ordered the troops &quot; here, carry it away &quot;. A more detailed record of the event is recounted by Thomas Salmon in his Chronological Historian (London, 1723, 106), thus: &quot; [Cromwell] commanded the Speaker to leave the Chair, and told them they had sat long enough, unless they had done more good, crying out You are no longer a Parliament, I say you are no Parliament. He told Sir Henry Vane he was a Jugler [sic]; Henry Martin and Sir Peter Wentworth, that they were Whoremasters; Thomas Chaloner, he was a Drunkard; and Allen the Goldsmith that he cheated the Publick: Then he bid one of his Soldiers take away that Fool&apos;s Bauble the mace and Thomas Harrison pulled the Speaker of the Chair; and in short Cromwell having turned them all out of the House, lock&apos;d up the Doors and returned to Whitehall. &quot; Salmon does not cite his own sources but the version is sufficiently detailed to suggest that he had access to descriptions of the event that were certainly current in his time, and were probably derived from eye-witness descriptions. It is therefore probably at least accurate in general tone, if not precise detail. Within a month of the Rump&apos;s dismissal, Oliver Cromwell on the advice of Harrison and with the support of other officers in the Army, sent a request to Congregational churches in every county to nominate those they considered fit to take part in the new government. On 4 July a Nominated Assembly, nicknamed the &quot; Assembly of Saints &quot; or Barebone&apos;s Parliament (named after one of its members), took on the role of more traditional English Parliaments. [ End of the Rump Parliament ] [ April 2011 ] Richard Cromwell, the third (and eldest surviving) son of Oliver Cromwell, was appointed Lord Protector after his father&apos;s death. He called the Third Protectorate Parliament in 1659. However, along with the Army, it was unable to form a stable government and after seven months the Army removed him. On 6 May 1659, it reinstalled the Rump Parliament. The Rump Parliament issued a declaration establishing a &quot; Commonwealth without a king, single person, or house of lords &quot;. However after a few months divisions in the Commonwealth were settled by force of arms. On 12 October the Rump voted to declare the seven commissioners&apos; responsibility for the Army void and appointed Charles Fleetwood commander-in-chief under the Speaker of the House. The next day on 13 October 1659 the Army in London under the command of John Lambert assisted by Charles Fleetwood excluded the Rump from Parliament by locking the doors to the Palace of Westminster and stationing armed guards outside. Lambert and Fleetwood created a 23 member Committee of Safety to govern the country in place of the Rump with General Fleetwood and Lambert directly under him, commander of the Army in England and Scotland. Sir Arthur Haselrig appealed to other Army generals to support the Rump against Fleetwood and Lambert. Fearing anarchy because of the conflict within Parliament and the general anger at the decisions the Rump had made, General George Monck, commander-in-chief of the English army in Scotland, declared that he was ready to uphold Parliament&apos;s authority and march at the head of his army to London, holding true to a statement in his book, &quot; Observations Upon Military and Political Affairs &quot; in which he said he valued the stability of his nation and the power of Parliament over his own life. On top of his military position Monck was in a particularly powerful position because of his former relationship with and endorsement from Oliver Cromwell, many imbued him with the power to affect who the next king would be. Lambert marched north against Monck in November 1659, but Lambert&apos;s army began to melt away, and he was kept in suspense by Monck till his whole army deserted and he returned to London almost alone. On 24 December 1659 the chastened Fleetwood approached the Speaker, William Lenthal, asking him to recall the Rump. The same day Lenthall took possession of the Tower and appointed commissioners for its government. The Rump met again on 26 December 1659. Parliament declared Monck commander-in-chief in England as well as Scotland. In January 1660, Monck marched into England, as Lambert&apos;s supporters in the Army were cashiered and his authority crumbled. When Sir Thomas Fairfax emerged from retirement to declare his support for Monck, Army support for Monck became almost unanimous. Monck entered London in February 1660 and he allowed the Presbyterian members, &apos;secluded&apos; in Pride&apos;s Purge of 1648, to re-enter parliament on 21 February 1660 on the condition that the restored Long Parliament would agree to dissolve themselves once general elections had been held. The Long Parliament dissolved itself on 16 March 1660, after preparing legislation for the Convention Parliament that formally invited King Charles II to be the English monarch in what has become known as the Restoration (of the House of Stuart). [ See also ] [ Rump Parliament ] Regicide List of Parliaments of England List of MPs not excluded from the English parliament in 1648 List of Ordinances and Acts of the Parliament of England, 1642–1660 [ Links and references ] British Civil Wars: Rump Parliament Chambers&apos; Book of Days : 20 April With a censored version of Cromwell&apos;s speech. http://castorblog.com/archives/000275.html with an uncensored version of Cromwell&apos;s speech. Full text of the Act erecting a High Court of Justice for the Trial of Charles I 6 January 1649 Full text of the Sentence of the High Court of Justice upon the King, 27 January, 1649 Full text of The Death Warrant of Charles I, 29 January, 1649 Full text of the Act appointing a Council of State, 13 February, 1649 Full text of the Act abolishing the Office of King, 17 March, 1649 Full text of the Act abolishing the House of Lords, 19 March, 1649 Full text of the Act declaring England to be a Commonwealth, 19 May, 1649 Full text of the Act declaring what Offences shall he adjudged Treason under the Commonwealth, 17 July, 1649 Full text of the Declaration by Oliver Cromwell and the Council of Officers after putting an End to the Long Parliament, 22 April, 1653 [ References ] [ Invalid length. ] [ Monck George Observations Upon Military and Political Affairs Authority London 1671 ] Category:English Civil War Category:17th-century English parliaments Category:Republicanism in England da:Rumpparlamentet de:Rumpfparlament (England) es:Parlamento Rabadilla fr:Parlement croupion no:Rumpparlamentet pl:Parlament Kadłubowy ru:Охвостье simple:Rump Parliament sv:Rumpparlamentet th:รัฐสภารัมพ์ uk:Охвістя zh:残缺议会