[ the company Waste Management, Inc other uses ] [ Sanitary engineering ] [ May 2011 ] Waste management in Kathmandu (Nepal) Waste management is the collection, transport, processing or disposal, managing and monitoring of waste materials. The term usually relates to materials produced by human activity, and the process is generally undertaken to reduce their effect on health, the environment or aesthetics. Waste management is a distinct practice from resource recovery which focuses on delaying the rate of consumption of natural resources. All wastes materials, whether they are solid, liquid, gas eous or radioactive fall within the remit of waste management Waste management practices can differ for developed and developing nation s, for urban and rural area s, and for residential and industrial producers. Management for non- hazardous waste residential and institutional waste in metropolitan areas is usually the responsibility of local government authorities, while management for non-hazardous commercial and industrial waste is usually the responsibility of the generator subject to local, national or international controls. [ Methods of disposal ] [ Landfill ] [ Landfill ] { Hawaii. } { landfill compaction vehicle in action. } Disposing of waste in a landfill involves burying the waste, and this remains a common practice in most countries. Landfills were often established in abandoned or unused quarries, mining voids or borrow pit s. A properly designed and well-managed landfill can be a hygienic and relatively inexpensive method of disposing of waste materials. Older, poorly designed or poorly managed landfills can create a number of adverse environmental impacts such as wind-blown litter, attraction of vermin, and generation of liquid leachate. Another common byproduct of landfills is gas (mostly composed of methane and carbon dioxide ), which is produced as organic waste breaks down anaerobically. This gas can create odor problems, kill surface vegetation, and is a greenhouse gas. { Vienna } Design characteristics of a modern landfill include methods to contain leachate such as clay or plastic lining material. Deposited waste is normally compacted to increase its density and stability, and covered to prevent attracting vermin (such as mice or rats ). Many landfills also have landfill gas extraction systems installed to extract the landfill gas. Gas is pumped out of the landfill using perforated pipes and flared off or burnt in a gas engine to generate electricity. [ Incineration ] [ Incineration ] Incineration is a disposal method in which solid organic wastes are subjected to combustion so as to convert them into residue and gaseous products. This method is useful for disposal of residue of both solid waste management and solid residue from waste water management.This process reduces the volumes of solid waste to 20 to 30 percent of the original volume. Incineration and other high temperature waste treatment systems are sometimes described as &quot; thermal treatment &quot;. Incinerators convert waste materials into heat, gas, steam and ash. Incineration is carried out both on a small scale by individuals and on a large scale by industry. It is used to dispose of solid, liquid and gaseous waste. It is recognized as a practical method of disposing of certain hazardous waste materials (such as biological medical waste ). Incineration is a controversial method of waste disposal, due to issues such as emission of gaseous pollutants. Incineration is common in countries such as Japan where land is more scarce, as these facilities generally do not require as much area as landfills. Waste-to-energy (WtE) or energy-from-waste (EfW) are broad terms for facilities that burn waste in a furnace or boiler to generate heat, steam or electricity. Combustion in an incinerator is not always perfect and there have been concerns about pollutants in gaseous emissions from incinerator stacks. Particular concern has focused on some very persistent organics such as dioxins, furan s, PAH s which may be created which may have serious environmental consequences. [ Recycling ] [ Recycling ] { recycling } Recycling is a resource recovery practice that refers to the collection and reuse of waste materials such as empty beverage containers. The materials from which the items are made can be reprocessed into new products. Material for recycling may be collected separately from general waste using dedicated bins and collection vehicles, or sorted directly from mixed waste streams. Known as kerb-side recycling, it requires the owner of the waste to separate it into various different bins (typically wheelie bins) prior to its collection. The most common consumer products recycled include aluminium such as beverage cans, copper such as wire, steel food and aerosol cans, old steel furnishings or equipment, polyethylene and PET bottles, glass bottles and jars, paperboard carton s, newspapers, magazines and light paper, and corrugated fibreboard boxes. PVC, LDPE, PP, and PS (see resin identification code ) are also recyclable. These items are usually composed of a single type of material, making them relatively easy to recycle into new products. The recycling of complex products (such as computers and electronic equipment) is more difficult, due to the additional dismantling and separation required. The type of material accepted for recycling varies by city and country. Each city and country have different recycling programs in place that can handle the various types of recyclable materials. However, variation in acceptance is reflected in the resale value of the material once it is reprocessed. [ Sustainability ] The management of waste is a key component in a business&apos; ability to maintaining ISO14001 accreditation. Companies are encouraged to improve their environmental efficiencies each year by eliminating waste through resource recovery practices, which are sustainablity-related activities. One way to do this is by shifting away from waste management to resource recovery practices like recycling. Materials such as glass, food scraps, paper and cardboard, plastic bottles and metal can be recycled. [ Biological reprocessing ] [ Composting Home composting Anaerobic digestion ] { compost heap. } Recoverable materials that are organic in nature, such as plant material, food scraps, and paper products, can be recovered through composting and digestion processes to decompose the organic matter. The resulting organic material is then recycled as mulch or compost for agricultural or landscaping purposes. In addition, waste gas from the process (such as methane) can be captured and used for generating electricity and heat (CHP/cogeneration) maximising efficiencies. The intention of biological processing in waste management is to control and accelerate the natural process of decomposition of organic matter. (See resource recovery ). [ Energy recovery ] [ Waste-to-energy ] { Lübeck } { mechanical biological treatment plant in Germany, 2007 } The energy content of waste products can be harnessed directly by using them as a direct combustion fuel, or indirectly by processing them into another type of fuel. Thermal treatment ranges from using waste as a fuel source for cooking or heating and the use of the gas fuel (see above), to fuel for boilers to generate steam and electricity in a turbine. Pyrolysis and gasification are two related forms of thermal treatment where waste materials are heated to high temperatures with limited oxygen availability. The process usually occurs in a sealed vessel under high pressure. Pyrolysis of solid waste converts the material into solid, liquid and gas products. The liquid and gas can be burnt to produce energy or refined into other chemical products (chemical refinery). The solid residue (char) can be further refined into products such as activated carbon. Gasification and advanced Plasma arc gasification are used to convert organic materials directly into a synthetic gas ( syngas ) composed of carbon monoxide and hydrogen. The gas is then burnt to produce electricity and steam.An alternative to pyrolisis is high temperature and pressure supercritical water decomposition (hydrothermal monophasic oxidation). [ Resource Recovery ] Resource recovery (as opposed to waste management) uses LCA (life cycle analysis) attempts to offer alternatives to waste management. For mixed MSW (Municipal Solid Waste) a number of broad studies have indicated that administration, source separation and collection followed by reuse and recycling of the non-organic fraction and energy and compost/fertilizer production of the organic material via anaerobic digestion to be the favoured path. [ Avoidance and reduction methods ] [ Waste minimization ] An important method of waste management is the prevention of waste material being created, also known as waste reduction. Methods of avoidance include reuse of second-hand products, repairing broken items instead of buying new, designing products to be refillable or reusable (such as cotton instead of plastic shopping bags), encouraging consumers to avoid using disposable products (such as disposable cutlery ), removing any food/liquid remains from cans, packaging,... { Removing food remains to reduce waste } and designing products that use less material to achieve the same purpose (for example, lightweighting of beverage cans). { PSC.edu } [ Waste handling and transport ] [ Waste collection vehicle Dustbin Waste sorting ] { Berkshire, England } Waste collection methods vary widely among different countries and regions. Domestic waste collection services are often provided by local government authorities, or by private companies in the industry. Some areas, especially those in less developed countries, do not have a formal waste-collection system. Examples of waste handling systems include: In Europe and a few other places around the world, a few communities use a proprietary collection system known as Envac, which conveys refuse via underground conduits using a vacuum system. Other vacuum-based solutions include the MetroTaifun single-line and ring-line systems. In Canadian urban centres curbside collection is the most common method of disposal, whereby the city collects waste and/or recyclables and/or organics on a scheduled basis. In rural areas people often dispose of their waste by hauling it to a transfer station. Waste collected is then transported to a regional landfill. In Taipei, the city government charges its households and industries for the volume of rubbish they produce. Waste will only be collected by the city council if waste is disposed in government issued rubbish bags. This policy has successfully reduced the amount of waste the city produces and increased the recycling rate. In Israel, the Arrow Ecology company has developed the ArrowBio system, which takes trash directly from collection trucks and separates organic and inorganic materials through gravitational settling, screening, and hydro-mechanical shredding. The system is capable of sorting huge volumes of solid waste, salvaging recyclables, and turning the rest into biogas and rich agricultural compost. The system is used in California, Australia, Greece, Mexico, the United Kingdom and in Israel. For example, an ArrowBio plant that has been operational at the Hiriya landfill site since December 2003 serves the Tel Aviv area, and processes up to 150 tons of garbage a day. &apos;&apos;Sorting through garbage for gold&apos;&apos;, retrieved 2009-11-24 While waste transport within a given country falls under national regulations, trans-boundary movement of waste is often subject to international treaties. A major concern to many countries in the world has been hazardous waste. The Basel Convention, ratified by 172 countries, deprecates movement of hazardous waste from developed to less developed countries. The provisions of the Basel convention have been integrated into the EU waste shipment regulation.Nuclear waste, although considered hazardous, does not fall under the jurisdiction of the Basel Convention. [ Technologies ] Traditionally the waste management industry has been slow to adopt new technologies such as RFID (Radio Frequency Identification) tags, GPS and integrated software packages which enable better quality data to be collected without the use of estimation or manual data entry. Technologies like RFID tags are now being used to collect data on presentation rates for curb-side pick-ups. Benefits of GPS tracking is particularly evident when considering the efficiency of ad hoc pick-ups (like skip bins or dumpsters) where the collection is done on a consumer request basis. Integrated software packages are useful in aggregating this data for use in optimisation of operations for waste collection operations. Rear vision cameras are commonly used for OH &amp; S reasons and video recording devices are becoming more widely used, particularly concerning residential services. [ Waste management concepts ] Diagram of the waste hierarchy. There are a number of concepts about waste management which vary in their usage between countries or regions. Some of the most general, widely used concepts include: Waste hierarchy - The waste hierarchy refers to the &quot; 3 Rs &quot; reduce, reuse and recycle, which classify waste management strategies according to their desirability in terms of waste minimization. The waste hierarchy remains the cornerstone of most waste minimization strategies. The aim of the waste hierarchy is to extract the maximum practical benefits from products and to generate the minimum amount of waste see: resource recovery. Polluter pays principle - the Polluter Pays Principle is a principle where the polluting party pays for the impact caused to the environment. With respect to waste management, this generally refers to the requirement for a waste generator to pay for appropriate disposal of the unrecoverable material. [ See also ] [ 2 ] Biomedical waste History of waste management Resource recovery List of waste disposal incidents List of waste management acronyms Sanitation Solid waste policy in the United States Solid Waste Policy in India [ References ] [ 2 ] [ External links ] [ Waste ] &apos;&apos;Waste = Food Documentary&apos;&apos; - A documentary on the Cradle to Cradle design concept of Michael Braungart and William McDonough. Envirowise UK Portal Clean Pyrolysis an alternative approach from Intervate Gasoline from Vinegar | MIT Technology Review [ May 2011 ] [ ro ] af:Afvalbestuur ar:إدارة المخلفات bn:আবর্জনা ব্যবস্থাপনা cs:Třídění odpadu da:Renovation de:Abfallwirtschaft et:Jäätmekäitlus es:Gestión de residuos eo:Rubmastrumado fa:مدیریت پسماند fr:Gestion des déchets gu:કચરાનો પ્રબંધ ko:폐기물 관리 hi:अपशिष्ट प्रबंधन hr:Gospodarenje otpadom id:Pengelolaan sampah is:Sorpstjórnun it:Gestione dei rifiuti kn:ತ್ಯಾಜ್ಯ ನಿರ್ವಹಣೆ kk:Өнеркәсіп қалдықтарын пайда асыру ltg:Palīku rāds lt:Atliekų tvarkymas ml:പാഴ്വസ്തു കൈകാര്യം ms:Pengurusan sisa nl:Vuilnisophaaldienst ja:循環型社会 pl:Utylizacja pt:Gestão integrada de resíduos sólidos ro:Gestionarea deșeurilor ru:Система управления отходами sl:Ravnanje z odpadki sh:Gospodarenje otpadom su:Ngokolakeun runtah fi:Jätehuolto sv:Avfallshantering ta:கழிவு மேலாண்மை te:వ్యర్థ పదార్థాల నిర్వహణ tr:Atık yönetimi vi:Quản lý chất thải yi:מיסט מאנאזשעריע zh:污染物排放控制技术