[ La Planète des singes Xan Fielding 200px 1970s film tie-in edition Pierre Boulle France French Science fiction novel Livre de Poche 1963 Print ( Hardback &amp; Paperback ) ] { Planet of the Apes } La Planète des singes, known in English as Monkey Planet or Planet of the Apes, [ http://www.amazon.com/Monkey-Planet-Pierre-Boulle/dp/0140024018/ref%3Dpd_rhf_p_t_1 Monkey Planet 2012-04-25 ] is a French 1963 science fiction novel by Pierre Boulle. It was published in the UK as Monkey Planet, then re-issued as Planet of the Apes to tie it in to the film franchise it inspired. The novel tells the tale of three human explorers from Earth who visit a planet orbiting the star Betelgeuse, in which great apes are the dominant intelligent and civilized species, whereas humans are reduced to a savage animal-like state. [ Plot ] The main events of the book are placed in a frame story, in which Jinn and Phyllis, a couple out on a pleasure cruise in a spaceship, find a message in a bottle floating in space. The message inside the bottle is the testimony of a man, Ulysse Mérou. Ulysse explains that he was a friend of Professor Antelle, a genius scientist on Earth, who invented a spaceship that could travel at nearly the speed of light. In 2500, Ulysse, the professor, and a physicist named Arthur Levain flew off in this ship to explore outer space. They traveled to the nearest star system that the professor theorized might be capable of life, the red sun Betelgeuse, which would take them about 350 years to reach. Because of time dilation, however, the trip seems to the travelers only to last two years. They arrive at the distant planetary system and find that it contains an Earth-like planet, which they name Soror ( Latin for sister). They land and discover that they can breathe the air, drink the water, and eat the local vegetation. They encounter other human beings on the planet, although these others act as primitively as chimpanzee s and destroy the clothing of the three astronauts. They are captured by the primitive humans and stay with them for a few hours. At the end of this time, they are startled to see a hunting party in the forest, consisting of gorilla s and chimpanzees using guns and machines. The apes wear human clothing identical to that of 20th-century Earth, except that they wear gloves instead of shoes on their prehensile feet. The hunting party shoots several of the humans for sport, including Levain, and capture others, including Ulysse. Ulysse is taken to the apes&apos; city, which looks exactly the same as a human city from 20th-century Earth, except that some smaller furniture exists for the use of the chimpanzees. While most of the humans captured by the hunting party are sold for manual labor, Ulysse is sent to a research facility. There, the apes perform experiments on the humans similar to Pavlov&apos;s conditioning experiments on dogs, and Ulysse proves his intelligence by failing to be conditioned, and by speaking and drawing geometrical figures. Ulysse is adopted by one of the researchers, Zira, a female chimpanzee, who teaches him the apes&apos; language. He learns from her all about the ape planet. Eventually, he is freed from his cage, and meets Zira&apos;s fiancé, Cornélius, a respected young scientist. With Cornélius&apos; help, he makes a speech in front of the ape President and numerous representatives, who grant him his liberty and is given specially tailored clothing. It is around this time that he discovers his companion Professor Antelle survived the hunt and was captured, being sent to the zoo and kept in captivity in a large cage with the primitive humans. However when the protagonist attempts to make contact and speak with the professor, it is revealed he has completely lost his mind and his faculties, degenerated and behaving just as the primitive humans do. Ulysse tours the city and learns about the apes&apos; civilization and history. The apes have a very ancient society, but their origins are lost in time. Their technology and culture have progressed slowly through the centuries because each generation, for the most part, imitates those of the past. The society is divided between the violent gorillas, the pedantic and conservative orangutans, and the intellectual chimpanzees. 1991 Russian edition of the book. Although Ulysse&apos;s patrons Zira and Cornélius are convinced of his intelligence, the society&apos;s leading orangutan scientists believe he is faking his understanding of language, because their philosophy will not allow the possibility of intelligent human beings. Ulysse falls in love with a primitive human female, Nova, whom he had met in the forest at the beginning of his visit to the planet. He impregnates her and thus proves that he is the same species as the primitive humans, which lowers his standing in the eyes of many of the apes. Their derision turns to fear with a discovery in a distant archaeological dig and an analysis of memory in some human brains. Evidence is uncovered that fills in the missing history of the apes. In the distant past, the planet was ruled by human beings who built a technological society and enslaved apes to perform their manual labor. Over time the humans became more and more dependent upon the apes, until eventually they became so lazy and degenerate that they were overthrown by their ape servants and fell into the primitive state in which our protagonist found them. While some of the apes reject this evidence, others (in particular, an old orangutan scientist, Dr. Zaius ) take it as a sign that the humans are a threat and must be exterminated. Ulysse learns of this, and escapes from the planet with his wife and newborn son, returning to Earth in the professor&apos;s spaceship. Ulysse lands on Earth more than 700 years after he had originally left it, just outside the city of Paris. Once outside the ship, he discovers that Earth is now ruled by intelligent apes just like the planet from which he has fled. He immediately leaves Earth in his ship, writes his story, places it in a bottle, and launches it into space for someone to find. It is at this point in the story that Jinn and Phyllis, the couple who found the bottle, are revealed to be chimpanzees. Jinn and Phyllis dismiss Ulysse&apos;s narrative, saying that a human would not have the intelligence to write such a story. [ Adaptations ] The novel has inspired a media franchise comprising seven films, two television series (one animated), and comic books. The first was Planet of the Apes (1968), a science fiction feature film directed by Franklin J. Schaffner from a screenplay by Michael Wilson and Rod Serling. [ http://www.mediacircus.net/pota.html Those Damned Dirty Apes! 2011-05-25 www.mediacircus.net ] It stars Charlton Heston. The film was a critical and commercial success, spawning four sequels. A second adaptation of the book was produced in 2001 directed by Tim Burton. A series reboot called Rise of the Planet of the Apes, directed by Rupert Wyatt, was released in August 2011 to critical and commercial success. It is intended to be the first in a new series of films. { Lussier, Germain. &quot; Collider Visits The Set of RISE OF THE PLANET OF THE APES; Plus Video Blog &quot;, Collider.com, 14 April 2011. Retrieved 2011-08-14. } [ See also ] Ape and Essence, a precursor novel by Aldous Huxley. [ References ] [ External links ] &apos;&apos;La Planète des singes&apos;&apos; at The Sacred Scrolls - History of the novel&apos;s international editions with book cover images. Category:1963 novels Category:French-language novels Category:French science fiction novels Category:1960s science fiction novels Category:Fantasy novels Category:Novels adapted into films Category:Planet of the Apes ar:كوكب القردة be-x-old:Плянэта малпаў (раман) bg:Планетата на маймуните de:Der Planet der Affen (Roman) et:Ahvide planeet es:El planeta de los simios (novela) fr:La Planète des singes it:Il pianeta delle scimmie (romanzo) he:כוכב הקופים nl:De Apenplaneet ja:猿の惑星 pl:Planeta małp pt:La planète des singes ro:Planeta maimuțelor (roman) ru:Планета обезьян (роман) fi:Apinoiden planeetta sv:Apornas planet (roman) vi:Hành tinh khỉ zh:人猿星球