[ the 1978 film starring Klaus Kinski The Song of Roland (film) ] Eight phases of &apos;&apos;The Song of Roland&apos;&apos; in one picture. The Song of Roland ( [ La Chanson de Roland ] ) is a heroic poem based on the Battle of Roncesvalles in 778, during the reign of Charlemagne. It is the oldest surviving major work of French literature. It exists in various manuscript versions which testify to its enormous and enduring popularity in the 12th to 14th centuries. The oldest of these is the Oxford manuscript which contains a text of some 4004 lines (the number varies slightly in different modern editions) and is usually dated to the middle of the twelfth century (between 1140 and 1170). The epic poem is the first and most outstanding example of the chanson de geste, a literary form that flourished between the eleventh and fifteenth centuries and celebrated the legendary deeds of a hero. [ Manuscripts ] There are nine extant manuscripts of the Song of Roland in Old French. The oldest of these manuscripts is held at the Bodleian Library at Oxford. This copy dates between 1140 and 1170 and was written in Anglo-Norman. [ Short Ian Introduction La Chanson de Roland 5–20 Le Livre de Poche 1990 France ] Scholars estimate that the poem was written between approximately 1040 and 1115, and most of the alterations were performed by about 1098. Some favor an earlier dating, because it allows one to say that the poem was inspired by the Castilian campaigns of the 1030s, and that the poem went on to be a major influence in the First Crusade. Those who prefer a later dating do so on grounds of the brief references made in the poem to events of the First Crusade. In one section, Palestine is named Outremer, its Crusader name – but is presented as a Muslim land where there are no Christians. [ Plot ] { Battle of Roncevaux, from an illuminated manuscript c.1455–1460. } For seven years, the valiant Christian king Charlemagne has made war against the Saracen s in Spain. Only one Muslim stronghold remains: the city of Saragossa, under the rule of King Marsile and Queen Bramimonde. Marsile, certain that defeat is inevitable, hatches a plot to rid Spain of Charlemagne. He will promise to be Charlemagne&apos;s vassal and a Christian convert in exchange for Charlemagne&apos;s departure. But once Charlemagne is back in France, Marsile will renege on his promises. Charlemagne and his vassals, weary of the long war, receive Marsile&apos;s messengers and try to choose an envoy to negotiate at Marsile&apos;s court on Charlemagne&apos;s behalf. Roland, a courageous knight and Charlemagne&apos;s nephew, nominates his stepfather, Ganelon. Ganelon is enraged, thinking that Roland has nominated him for this dangerous mission in an attempt to be rid of him for good. Ganelon has long been jealous of Roland, and on his diplomatic mission he plots with the Saracens, telling them that they could ambush Charlemagne&apos;s rear guard as Charlemagne leaves Spain. Roland will undoubtedly lead the rearguard, and Ganelon promises that with Roland dead, Charlemagne will lose the will to fight. After Ganelon returns with assurances of Marsile&apos;s good faith, Roland, as predicted, ends up leading the rearguard. The twelve peers, later known as the Paladin s, Charlemagne&apos;s greatest and most beloved vassals, go with him. Among them is Oliver, a wise and prudent man and Roland&apos;s best friend. Also in the rearguard is the fiery Archbishop Turpin, a clergyman who also is a great warrior. At the pass of Roncevaux, the twenty thousand Christians of the rearguard are ambushed by a vastly superior force, numbering four hundred thousand. Oliver counsels Roland to blow his olifant horn, to call back Charlemagne&apos;s main force, but Roland refuses. The Franks fight valiantly, but in the end they are killed to the man. Roland gives three long mighty blasts on his oliphant so that Charlemagne will return and avenge them. His temples burst from the force required, and he presently expires. He positions himself so as to face toward the enemy&apos;s land before dying, and his soul is escorted to heaven by Saint Gabriel, Saint Michael and assorted cherubim. Image of the devastation of the frank troops (from a book of the song of Roland) Charlemagne arrives, and he and his men are overwhelmed with grief at the sight of the massacre. He pursues the pagan force, aided by a miracle of God; the sun is held in place in the sky so that the enemy will not have cover of night. The Franks push the Saracen s into the river Ebro, where those who are not chopped to pieces are drowned. Marsile has escaped, though Roland succeeded in cutting off his right hand in battle. Wounded and demoralised, he returns to Saragossa, where the remaining Saracens are plunged into despair by their losses. But Baligant, the incredibly powerful emir of Babylon, has arrived to help his vassal. The emir goes to Roncevaux where the Franks are mourning and burying their dead. There is a terrible battle which climaxes with a one-on-one clash between Baligant and Charlemagne. With a touch of divine aid, Charlemagne slays Baligant, and the Saracens retreat. The Franks take Saragossa, where they destroy all Jew ish and Muslim religious items and force the conversion of everyone in the city with the exception of Queen Bramimonde. Charlemagne wants her to come to Christ through the agency of love. With her as a captive, the Franks return to their capital, Aachen or Aix-la-Chapelle. Ganelon is put on trial for treason. Pinabel, Ganelon&apos;s kinsman and a gifted speaker, nearly sways the judges to let Ganelon go. But Thierry, a brave but physically unimposing knight, says that Ganelon&apos;s revenge should not have been taken against a man in Charlemagne&apos;s service and constitutes treason. To decide the matter, Pinabel and Thierry fight. Though Pinabel is the stronger man, God intervenes and Thierry triumphs. The Franks give Ganelon a traitor&apos;s death: &quot; Four chargers are brought out and tied to Ganelon&apos;s feet and hands...four sergeants drive them past the spectators towards a stream...Ganelon is lost, his ligaments will be stretched intolerably until all his limbs are torn apart. &quot; { Verse translation by C H Sisson, Carcanet Press, Manchester 1983. } They also hang thirty of his kinsmen, not including Pinabel, who is already dead. Charlemagne announces to all that Bramimonde has decided to become a Christian. Her baptism is celebrated, and all seems well. But that night the angel Gabriel comes to Charlemagne in a dream and tells him that he must depart for yet another war against the pagans. Weary and weeping, but resigned to the will of God, Charlemagne inwardly prepares himself for what is to come. [ Form ] Karlomagno finds Roland dead (XIV. mendeko miniatura) The poem is written in stanza s of irregular length known as laisse s. The lines are decasyllabic (containing ten syllables), and each is divided by a strong caesura which generally falls after the fourth syllable. The last stressed syllable of each line in a laisse has the same vowel sound as every other end-syllable in that laisse. The laisse is therefore an assonal, not a rhyming stanza. On a narrative level, the Song of Roland features extensive use of repetition, parallelism, and thesis-antithesis pairs. Unlike later Renaissance and Romantic literature, the poem focuses on action rather than introspection. The author gives few explanations for characters&apos; behavior. The warriors are stereotypes defined by a few salient traits; for example, Roland is loyal and trusting while Ganelon, though brave, is traitorous and vindictive. The story moves at a fast pace, occasionally slowing down and recounting the same scene up to three times but focusing on different details or taking a different perspective each time. The effect is similar to a film sequence shot at different angles so that new and more important details come to light with each shot. [ Characters ] [ Principal characters ] Baligant, emir of Babylon; Marsile enlists his help against Charlemagne. Blancandrin, wise pagan; suggests bribing Charlemagne out of Spain with hostages and gifts, and then suggests dishonouring a promise to allow Marsile&apos;s baptism Bramimonde, Queen of Saragossa; captured and converted by Charlemagne after the city falls Charlemagne, Holy Roman Emperor; his forces fight the Saracens in Spain. Ganelon, treacherous lord and Roland&apos;s stepfather who encourages Marsile to attack the French King Marsile, Saracen king of Spain; Roland wounds him and he dies of his wound later. Olivier, Roland&apos;s friend; mortally wounded by Margarice. He represents wisdom. Roland, the hero of the Song; nephew of Charlemagne; leads the rear guard of the French forces; bursts his temples by blowing his oliphant-horn, wounds from which he eventually dies facing the enemy&apos;s land. Turpin, Archbishop of Rheims, represents the force of the Church. [ Secondary characters ] Aude, the fiancée of Roland and Olivier&apos;s sister Basan, French baron, murdered while serving as Ambassador of Marsile. Bérengier, one of the twelve paladins killed by Marsile’s troops; kills Estramarin; killed by Grandoyne. Besgun, chief cook of Charlemagne&apos;s army; guards Ganelon after Ganelon&apos;s treachery is discovered. Geboin, guards the French dead; becomes leader of Charlemagne&apos;s 2nd column. Godefroy, standard bearer of Charlemagne; brother of Thierry, Charlemagne’s defender against Pinabel. Grandoyne, fighter on Marsile’s side; son of the Cappadocia n King Capuel; kills Gerin, Gerier, Berenger, Guy St. Antoine, and Duke Astorge; killed by Roland. Hamon, joint Commander of Charlemagne&apos;s Eighth Division. Lorant, French commander of one of the of first divisions against Baligant; killed by Baligant. Milon, guards the French dead while Charlemagne pursues the Saracen forces. Ogier, a Dane who leads the third column in Charlemagne&apos;s army against Baligant&apos;s forces. Othon, guards the French dead while Charlemagne pursues the Saracen forces. Pinabel, fights for Ganelon in the judicial combat. Thierry, fights for Charlemagne in the judicial combat. [ Adaptations ] A Latin poem, Carmen de Prodicione Guenonis, was composed around 1120, and a Latin prose version, Historia Caroli Magni (often known as &quot; The Pseudo-Turpin &quot; ) even earlier. Around 1170, a version of the French poem was translated into the Middle High German Rolandslied by Konrad der Pfaffe (possible author also of the Kaiserchronik ). In his translation Konrad replaces French topics with generically Christian ones. The work was translated into Middle Dutch in the 13th century. It was also rendered into Occitan verse in the 14th or 15th century poem of Ronsasvals, which incorporates the later, southern aesthetic into the story. An Old Norse version of the Song of Roland exists as Karlamagnús saga, and a translation into the artificial literary language of Franco-Venetian is also known; such translations contributed to the awareness of the story in Italy. In 1516 Ludovico Ariosto published his epic Orlando Furioso, which deals largely with characters first described in the Song of Roland. There is also Faroese adoption of this ballad named &quot; Runtsivalstríðið &quot; (Battle of Roncevaux). The ballad is one of many sung during the Faroese folkdance tradition of chain dancing. [ Modern adaptations ] The English progressive rock band Van der Graaf Generator recorded a song, &quot; Roncevaux &quot;, that tells the famous story. Norwegian folk metal band Glittertind [ Glittertind - Rolandskvadet (live) http://www.youtube.com/watch?v%3D9ErNXdtNRPI YouTube 2012-04-21 ] and Norwegian polyphonic vocal group Trio Mediæval both recorded versions of &quot; Rolandskvadet, &quot; based on part of &quot; The Song of Roland. &quot; The Norwegian singer Erik Bye has also made a musical interpretation called &quot; Rolandskvadet &quot;. The French black metal band Peste Noire used a fragment of the Song of Roland as lyrics for their song &apos;La Fin del Secle&apos;. The Warren Zevon song &quot; Roland the Headless Thompson Gunner &quot; includes parallels with &quot; The Song of Roland. &quot; In Zevon&apos;s song, the eponymous Roland has his head blown off by one of his fellow mercanaries, named Van Owen (a name resembling the trisyllable pronunciation of Ganelon). In addition, both Van Owen and Ganelon meet bloody reprisals for their deeds. Van Owen&apos;s body is blown from &quot; here to Johannesburg &quot; by a decapitated Roland while Ganelon is torn in pieces for being a traitor to Charlemagne&apos;s army. The Italian composer Luigi Dallapiccola set &quot; Rencesvals: Trois Fragments de la Chanson de Roland &quot; for mezzo-soprano and piano in 1946. It was dedicated &quot; à mes amis Pierre Bernac et Francis Poulenc, &quot; the leading performers of French art song at the time, and is typical of Dallapiccola&apos;s usage of the 12-tone style of composition. The Chanson de Roland has an important place in the background of Graham Greene &apos;s The Confidential Agent. The book&apos;s protagonist had been a Medieval scholar specialising in this work, until the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War forced him to become a soldier and secret agent. Throughout the book, he repeatedly compares himself and other characters with the characters of &quot; Roland &quot;. Particularly, the book includes a full two pages of specific commentary, which is relevant to its 20th Century plotline: &quot; Oliver, when he saw the Saracens coming, urged Roland to blow his horn and fetch back Charlemagne - but Roland wouldn&apos;t blow. A big brave fool. In war one always chooses the wrong hero. Oliver should have been the hero of that song, instead of being given second place with the blood-thirsty Bishop Turpin.(...) In the Oxford version Oliver is reconciled in the end, he gives Roland his death-blow by accident, his eyes blinded by wounds. [But] the story had been tidied up. In truth, Oliver strikes his friend down in full knowledge - because of what he has done to his men, all the wasted lives. Oliver dies hating the man he loves - the big boasting courageous fool who was more concerned with his own glory than with the victory of his faith. This makes the story tragedy, not just heroics &quot;. { &quot; } { The Confidential Agent &quot;, Part 1, Ch. 2, quoted in &quot; Graham Greene: an approach to the novels &quot; by Robert Hoskins, p. 122 } [ See also ] La Brèche de Roland Matter of France Herzog Ernst Lamprecht [ Notes ] [ External links ] [ fr La Chanson de Roland ] [ 391 The Song of Roland ] [ 1905 The Song of Roland ] (English translation of Charles Kenneth Scott Moncrieff ) The Digby 23 Project at Baylor University The Song of Roland La Chanson de Roland (Old French) The Romance of the Middle Ages: The Song of Roland, discussion of Oxford, Bodleian Library MS Digby 23, audio clip, and discussion of the manuscript&apos;s provenance. Earliest manuscript of the Chanson de Roland, readable online images of the complete original, Oxford, Bodleian Library MS Digby 23 (Pt 2) &quot; La Chanson de Roland, in Anglo-Norman, 12th century, ? 2nd quarter &quot;. Old French Audio clips of a reading of The Song of Roland in Old French Timeless Myths: Song of Roland Category:Chansons de geste Category:French poems Category:Roland Category:Medieval literature Category:Monomyths Category:Works of unknown authorship [ ja ] af:Rolandslied ar:نشيد رولاند an:Canta de Roldán be-x-old:Песьня пра Роланда bg:Песен за Ролан br:La Chanson de Roland ca:Cançó de Rotllan cs:Píseň o Rolandovi da:Rolandskvadet de:Rolandslied et:Rolandi laul es:Cantar de Roldán eo:Kanto de Roland eu:Errolanen kantua fa:سرود رولاند fr:La Chanson de Roland gl:La Chanson de Roland ko:롤랑의 노래 hr:Pjesma o Rolandu it:Chanson de Roland he:שירת רולאן mrj:Роланд гишӓн мыры la:La chanson de Roland nl:Roelantslied ja:ローランの歌 no:Rolandskvadet oc:Cançon de Rotland pl:Pieśń o Rolandzie pt:A Canção de Rolando ro:Cântecul lui Roland ru:Песнь о Роланде sk:Pieseň o Rolandovi sl:Pesem o Rolandu sr:Песма о Ролану sh:La Chanson de Roland fi:Rolandin laulu sv:Rolandssången tr:Roland Destanı uk:Пісня про Роланда zh:罗兰之歌