[ P 95 p 90 ] { 002304 } { search } { Stillbirth } { D050497 } A stillbirth occurs when a fetus has died in the uterus. A wide variety of definitions exist. [ Nguyen RH, Wilcox AJ Terms in reproductive and perinatal epidemiology: 2. Perinatal terms J Epidemiol Community Health 59 12 1019–21 2005 December 16286486 1732966 10.1136/jech.2004.023465 There is probably no health outcome with a greater number of conflicting, authoritative, legally mandated definitions. The basic WHO definition of fetal death is the intrauterine death of any conceptus at any time during pregnancy. However, for practical purposes, legal definitions usually require recorded fetal deaths to attain some gestational age (16, 20, 22, 24, or 28 weeks) or birth weight (350, 400, 500, or 1000 g). In the US states, there are eight different definitions by combinations of gestational age and weight, and at least as many in Europe. ] Once the fetus has died, the mother may or may not have contractions and undergo childbirth. The term is often used in distinction to live birth or miscarriage and the word miscarriage is oftentimes used incorrectly to describe stillbirths. Most stillbirths occur in full-term pregnancies. [ Human stillbirth ] [ Causes ] The causes of a large percentage of human stillbirths remain unknown, even in cases where extensive testing and autopsy have been performed. A rarely used term to describe these is sudden antenatal death syndrome or SADS, a phrase coined by Cacciatore &amp; Collins in 2000. [ Collins JH Umbilical cord accidents: human studies Semin. Perinatol. 26 1 79–82 2002 February 11876571 10.1053/sper.2002.29860 ] In cases where the cause is known, some possibilities of the cause of death are: &quot; Prolapsed umbilical cord &quot; - Prolapse of the umbilical cord happens when the fetus is not in a correct position in the pelvis. Membranes rupture and the cord is pushed out through the cervix. When the fetus pushes on the cervix, the cord is compressed and blocks blood and oxygen flow to the fetus. The mother has approximately 10 minutes to get to a doctor before there is any harm done to the fetus. &quot; Monoamniotic twins &quot; - These twins share the same placenta and the same amniotic sac and therefore can interfere with each other&apos;s umbilical cords. When entanglement of the cords is detected, it is highly recommended to deliver the fetuses as early as 31 weeks. Entanglement of cord in twin pregnancy at the time of Caesarean Section Umbilical cord length - A short umbilical cord ( &lt; 30  cm) can affect the fetus in that fetal movements can cause cord compression, constriction and ruptures. A long umbilical cord ( &gt; 72  cm) can affect the fetus depending on the way the fetus interacts with the cord. Some fetuses grasp the umbilical cord but it is yet unknown as to whether a fetus is strong enough to compress and stop blood flow through the cord. Also, an active fetus, one that frequently repositions itself in the uterus can cause entanglement with the cord. A hyperactive fetus should be evaluated with ultrasound to rule out cord entanglement. Cord entanglement - The umbilical cord can wrap around an extremity, the body or the neck of the fetus. When the cord is wrapped around the neck of the fetus it is called a nuchal cord. Again, these entanglements can cause constriction of blood flow. These entanglements can be visualized with ultrasound. Torsion - This term refers to the twisting of the umbilical around itself. Torsion of the umbilical cord is very common ( especially in equine stillbirths) but it is not a natural state of the umbilical cord.The umbilical cord can be untwisted at delivery. The average cord has 3 twists. Sometimes a pregnancy is terminated deliberately during a late phase, for example for congenital anomaly. UK law requires these procedures to be registered as &quot; stillbirths &quot;. { Bythell M, et al. (2008) The contribution of late termination of pregnancy to stillbirth rates in Northern England, 1994-2005. The British Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, 115(5):664-666 } [ Prenatal diagnosis ] It is unknown how much time is needed for a fetus to die. Fetal behavior is consistent and a change in the fetus&apos; movements or sleep-wake cycles can indicate fetal distress. A decrease or cessation in sensations of fetal activity may be an indication of fetal distress or death, though it is not entirely uncommon for a healthy fetus to exhibit such changes, particularly near the end of a pregnancy when there is considerably little space in the uterus for the fetus to move about. Still, medical examination, including a nonstress test, is recommended in the event of any type of any change in the strength or frequency of fetal movement, especially a complete cease; most midwives and obstetrician s recommend the use of a kick chart to assist in detecting any changes. Fetal distress or death can be confirmed or ruled out via fetoscopy / doptone, ultrasound, and/or electronic fetal monitoring. If the fetus is alive but inactive, extra attention will be given to the placenta and umbilical cord during ultrasound examination to ensure that there is no compromise of oxygen and nutrient delivery. [ Constricted umbilical cord ] When the umbilical cord is constricted (q.v. &quot; accidents &quot; above), the fetus experiences periods of hypoxia, and may respond by unusually high periods of kicking or struggling, to free the umbilical cord. These are sporadic if constriction is due to a change in the fetus&apos; or mother&apos;s position, and may become worse or more frequent as the fetus grows. Extra attention should be given if mothers experience large increases in kicking from previous childbirths, especially when increases correspond to position changes. { http://www.preginst.com/pucp.html } [ Prevention ] As many of the causes are unknown or untreatable, prevention is difficult.Symptoms of bacterial infection, such as from a dental abscess, in pregnant women may also include unusual periods of incoherence and symptoms of shock, and should be treated by a physician immediately. High blood pressure, diabetes and drug use should be regulated with physician&apos;s advice. Umbilical cord constriction may be identified and observed by ultrasound, if requested. Research published in the Journal of the American Medical Association in 2011 found a number of maternal factors associated with stillbirth. Among them: being age 40 or older, having diabetes, having a history of addiction to illegal drugs, being overweight or obese, and smoking cigarettes in the three months before getting pregnant. { http://www.cbsnews.com/8301-500368_162-57342588/studies-identify-stillbirth-risk-factors-causes/ } [ Prenatal maternal treatment ] An in utero stillbirth does not usually present an immediate health risk to the woman and labour will usually begin spontaneous ly after two weeks, so the woman may choose to wait and birth the fetal remains vaginally. After two weeks, the woman is at risk of developing blood clot ting problems, and labor induction is recommended at this point. In many cases, the woman will find the idea of carrying the dead fetus emotionally traumatizing and will elect to be induced. Caesarean birth is not recommended unless complications develop during vaginal birth. [ Prevalence ] The mean stillbirth rate in the United States is approximately 1 in 115 births, which is roughly 26,000 stillbirths each year, or on an average one every 20 minutes. In Australia, [ Gordon Adrienne (Dr) Department of Neonatal Medicine Protocol Book: Royal Prince Alfred Hospital http://www.sswahs.nsw.gov.au/RPA/neonatal/html/Newprot/stillbirths.html 2006-09-13 ] England, Wales, and Northern Ireland, the rate is approximately 1 in every 200 births, in Scotland 1 in 167. (From The National Statistical Office and other sources.) Many stillbirths occur at fullterm to apparently healthy mothers, and a postmortem evaluation reveals a cause of death in only about 40% of autopsied cases. { Cacciatore, J. (2007). A phenomenological exploration of stillbirth and the effects of ritualization on maternal anxiety and depression, University of Nebraska-Lincoln Press, Digital Commons; Froen, J.F. (2005). } In developing countries, where medical care can be of low quality or unavailable, the stillbirth rate is much higher. [ Legal definitions of stillbirth ] [ Australia ] In Australia any stillborn weighing more than 400  grams, or more than 20 weeks in gestation, must have its birth registered. [ Lahra MM, Gordon A, Jeffery HE Chorioamnionitis and fetal response in stillbirth Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol. 196 3 229.e1–4 2007 Stillbirth is defined within Australia as fetal death (no signs of life), whether antepartum or intrapartum, at ≥20 weeks of gestation or ≥400 g birthweight, if gestational age is unknown. 17346531 10.1016/j.ajog.2006.10.900 ] [ Austria ] In Austria a stillbirth is defined as birth of a child of at least 500 g weight without vital signs, i.e. blood circulation, breath or muscle movements. [ Canada ] Beginning in 1959, &quot; the definition of a stillbirth was revised to conform, in substance, to the definition of fetal death recommended by the World Health Organization. &quot; { Statistics Canada ( &quot; Canada&apos;s National Statistical Agency &quot; ), History, Vital Statistics - Stillbirth Database, in Vital Statistics – Stillbirth Database. } The definition of &quot; fetal death &quot; promulgated by the World Health Organization in 1950 is as follows: &quot; Fetal death &quot; means death prior to the complete expulsion or extraction from its mother of a product of human conception, irrespective of the duration of pregnancy and which is not an induced termination of pregnancy. The death is indicated by the fact that after such expulsion or extraction, the fetus does not breathe or show any other evidence of life, such as beating of the heart, pulsation of the umbilical cord, or definite movement of voluntary muscles. Heartbeats are to be distinguished from transient cardiac contractions; respirations are to be distinguished from fleeting respiratory efforts or gasps. [ Germany ] In Germany a stillbirth is defined as birth of a child of at least 500g weight without blood circulation or breath. Details for burial vary amongst the federal states. { http://www.initiative-regenbogen.de/gesetze.htm } [ Ireland ] Since 1 Jan 1995 stillbirths occurring in the Republic of Ireland must be registered; stillbirths which occurred before that date can also be registered but evidence is required. { http://www.citizensinformation.ie/categories/birth-family-relationships/miscarriage-and-stillbirth/registering_stillbirth } For the purposes of civil registration, s.1 of the Stillbirths Registration Act 1994 refers to :- &quot;...a child weighing at least 500  grammes, or having reached a gestational age of at least 24 weeks who shows no signs of life. &quot; [ United Kingdom ] The registration of still-births has been required in England and Wales from 1927, in Scotland from 1939 but is not required in Northern Ireland. England and Wales For the purposes of the Births and Deaths Registration Act 1926 (as amended), section 12 contains the definition that :- “still-born” and “still-birth” shall apply to any child which has issued forth from its mother after the twenty fourth week of pregnancy and which did not at any time after being completely expelled from its mother, breathe or show any other signs of life. A similar definition is applied within the Births and Deaths Registration Act 1953 (as amended), contained in s.41. The above definitions apply within those Acts thus other legislation will not necessarily be in identical terms. s.2 of the 1953 Act requires that registration of a birth takes place within 42 days of the birth except where an inquest takes place or the child has been &quot; found exposed &quot; in which latter case the time limit runs from the time of finding. Extracts from the register of still-births are restricted to those who have obtained consent from the Registrar General for England and Wales. Scotland Section 56(1) of the Registration of Births, Deaths and Marriages (Scotland) Act 1965 (as amended) contains the definition that :- “still-born child” means a child which has issued forth from its mother after the twenty-fourth week of pregnancy and which did not at any time after being completely expelled from its mother breathe or show any other signs of life, and the expression “still-birth” shall be construed accordingly s.21(1) of the same Act requires that :- Except so far as otherwise provided by this section or as may be prescribed, the provisions of this Part of this Act shall, so far as applicable, apply to still-births in like manner as they apply to births of children born alive. In the general case, s.14 of the Act requires that a birth has to be registered within 21 days of the birth or of the child being found. Unlike the registers for births, marriages, civil partnerships and deaths, the register of still-births is not open to public access and issue of extracts requires the permission of the Registrar General for Scotland. Northern Ireland In Northern Ireland the Births and Deaths Registration (Northern Ireland) Order 1976, as amended contains the definition :- “still-birth” means the complete expulsion or extraction from its mother after the twenty-fourth week of pregnancy of a child which did not at any time after being completely expelled or extracted breathe or show any other evidence of life. Registration of still-births can be made by a relative or certain other persons involved with the still-birth but it is not compulsory to do so. Registration takes place with the District Registrar for the Registration District where the still-birth occurred or for the District in which the mother is resident. A still-birth certificate will be issued to the registrant with further copies only available to those obtaining official consent for their issue. Registration may be made within three months of the still-birth { NI Direct - Registering a Still-birth } [ United States ] In the United States, there is no standard definition of the term &apos;stillbirth&apos;. [ Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Centers for Disease Control and Prevention State Definitions and Reporting Requirements 1997 Revision National Center for Health Statistics http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/misc/itop97.pdf PDF ] The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention collects statistical information on &quot; live births, fetal deaths, and induced termination of pregnancy &quot; from 57 reporting areas in the United States. Each reporting area has different guidelines and definitions for what is being reported; many do not use the term &quot; stillbirth &quot; at all. The federal guidelines suggests (at page 1) that fetal death and stillbirth can be interchangeable terms. The CDC definition of &quot; fetal death &quot; is based on the definition promulgated by the World Health Organization in 1950 (see section above on Canada ). Researchers are learning more about the long term psychiatric sequelae of traumatic birth and believe the effects may be intergenerational { Cacciatore, J. (2010). Unique stories of women and their families after the death of a baby. Journal of Healthcare Social Work, 49(2), 134-148. } The federal guidelines recommend reporting those fetal deaths whose birth weight is over 12.5 oz (350g), or those more than 20 weeks gestation. Forty-one areas use a definition very similar to the federal definition, thirteen areas use a shortened definition of fetal death, and three areas have no formal definition of fetal death. Only 11 areas specifically use the term &apos;stillbirth&apos;, often synonymously with late fetal death, however they are split between whether stillbirths are &quot; irrespective of the duration of pregnancy &quot;, or whether some age or weight constraint is applied. A movement in the U.S. has changed the way that stillbirths are documented through vital records. Previously, only the deaths were reported. However 27 states have enacted legislation that offers some variation of a birth certificate as an option for parents who choose to pay for one MAB Legislative Page [MAB legislative page] [ See also ] Sudden infant death syndrome { Abortion } Ectopic pregnancy Molar pregnancy { Spontaneous abortion } { Maternal death } { Smoking and pregnancy } { Stillbirth and Neonatal Death Society } [ References ] [ 2 ] [ Further reading ] G. J. Barker-Benfield, &quot; Stillbirth and Sensibility The Case of Abigail and John Adams, &quot; Early American Studies, An Interdisciplinary Journal, Spring 2012, Vol. 10 Issue 1, pp 2–29. [ External links ] Unspoken Grief.com Support for parents grieving due to perinatal loss (miscarriage, stillbirth, neonatal death).A safe place to share your story. Share Pregnancy &amp; Infant Loss Support Support for parents who have experienced the death of a baby through early pregnancy loss, stillbirth or infant death. The Wisconsin Stillbirth Service Program (WiSSP), a branch of the University of Wisconsin-Madison&apos;s Clinical Genetics Center. One of the foremost authorities on the causes of stillbirth and responsible for many stillbirth evaluation protocols, including the widespread use of the Kleihauer-Betke test in deciding whether Rh disease is to blame for a stillbirth. This program is now directed by Dr. Elispeth McPherson at the Marshfield Clinic in Marshfield, WI. Pregnancy Institute founded by Dr. Jason H. Collins, OB/GYN specializes in umbilical cord research Investigating perinatal death: a review of the options when autopsy consent is refused. UK Stillbirth and Neonatal Death Society Category:Pathology of pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium Category:Fertility Category:Demography Category:Death ar:إملاص da:Dødfødsel de:Totgeburt es:muerte fetal fr:Mortinatalité ja:死産 pl:Wewnątrzmaciczne obumarcie płodu pt:Natimorto simple:Stillbirth fi:Kohtukuolema ta:செத்துப் பிறப்பு th:ทารกตายคลอด zh-yue:胎死腹中 zh:死產