[ 42.360732 -71.083774 dms type:landmark title ] { 976 } { 263 } { 190 } { US$ 657 million } { Mission } { To develop principled, innovative leaders who improve the world and to generate ideas that advance management practice. } { 95px } The MIT Sloan School of Management (also known as MIT Sloan or Sloan) is the business school of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, in Cambridge, Massachusetts. { About MIT Sloan: Mission } MIT Sloan offers bachelor&apos;s, master&apos;s, and doctoral programs, as well as non-degree executive education, and has over 20,000 alumni globally. { About MIT Sloan: Students and Alumni } Its largest program is its full-time MBA, which is one of the most selective in the world, [ http://images.businessweek.com/slideshows/20111013/most-selective-business-schools/ Most Selective Business Schools Bloomberg BusinessWeek October 20, 2011 ] with students from more than 60 countries every year, and ranked #1 in more subjects than any other MBA program. { US News Business Specialties } MIT Sloan places great emphasis on innovation and invention, and many of the world&apos;s most famous management and finance theories —including the Black–Scholes model, the binomial options pricing model, the Modigliani–Miller theorem, the neoclassical growth model, the random walk hypothesis, Theory X and Theory Y, and the field of System Dynamics —were developed at the school. Several Nobel laureates in economics and John Bates Clark Medal winners have been on the faculty. MIT Sloan Management Review, a leading academic journal focused on the management of innovation, has been published by the school since 1959. [ History ] { state-of-the-art MIT Sloan main building, E62, opened in 2010 } The MIT Sloan School of Management began in 1914, as the engineering administration curriculum (or &quot; Course 15 &quot; in the MIT parlance) in the MIT Department of Economics and Statistics. The scope and depth of this educational focus have grown steadily in response to advances in the theory and practice of management to today&apos;s broad-based management school. A program offering a master&apos;s degree in management was established in 1925. The world&apos;s first university-based executive education program —the Sloan Fellows program —was created in 1931 under the sponsorship of Alfred P. Sloan, himself an 1895 MIT graduate, who was chairman of General Motors and has since been credited with creating the modern corporation. [ http://www.boston.com/news/education/higher/specials/mit150/mitlist/?page%3Dfull The MIT 150: 150 Ideas, Inventions, and Innovators that Helped Shape Our World The Boston Globe May 15, 2011 August 8, 2011 ] An Alfred P. Sloan Foundation grant established the MIT School of Industrial Management in 1952 with the charge of educating the &quot; ideal manager &quot;, and the school was renamed in Sloan&apos;s honor as the Alfred P. Sloan School of Management. In the 1960s, the school played a leading role in founding the first Indian Institute of Management. In 1990, the MIT Entrepreneurship Center was founded at MIT Sloan, one of the few business school entrepreneurship centers in the world focused on high tech. It sponsors both the MIT $100K Entrepreneurship Competition as well as the popular and unique Entrepreneurship Lab and Global Entrepreneurship Lab courses, which sponsor MBA students to work on-site with start-ups throughout the world. The school has grown to the point where management has become the second largest undergraduate major at MIT, and in 2005, an undergraduate minor in management was opened to 100 students each year. The Sloan Business Club is the official undergraduate business club for all MIT students. [ http://tech.mit.edu/V130/N46/sumasebc.html Business clubs join together MIT Tech Oct 19, 2010 ] MIT Sloan has numerous initiatives to establish business practices that strengthen local economies and positively shape the future of global business. These include initiatives aimed at giving people and organizations the knowledge to conduct business productively in every corner of the world. Examples of MIT Sloan&apos;s primary initiatives in this arena are the MIT-China Management Education Project, the International Faculty Fellows Program, and partnerships with IMD, IESE, Tsinghua University, the Sungkyunkwan University Graduate School of Business, the New University of Lisbon, and the Skolkovo Moscow School of Management. In addition to these programs, the school is engaged in other educational and research initiatives on five continents. [ Student life ] The Tang Center, E51, houses classrooms and breakout rooms The MIT Sloan culture is similar to, but also distinct from, overall MIT culture, and is influenced most strongly by its MBA program. The curriculum is focused on action learning, which requires that students apply concepts learned in the classroom to real-world business settings. Courses are taught using both the case method as well as through lecture s and team projects. The academic level of coursework is considered extremely rigorous by business school standards, with a greater emphasis on analytical reasoning and quantitative analysis than most top programs. Courses are offered in accounting, economics, entrepreneurship, finance, industrial relations, information technology, leadership, marketing, operations management, organizational behavior, statistics, strategic management, supply chain management, and many other fields. Academic rigor has a strong influence on the school&apos;s culture. The first semester, also known as the core, is the most difficult of all semesters by design. Students are required to take the following courses: Economic Analysis for Business Decisions, Financial Accounting, DMD (Data, Models and Decisions), Organizational Processes, and Communication for Managers. In addition, they may choose to take either Finance Theory or Introduction to Marketing. In 2005, the students and faculty expressed solidarity against the core by wearing t-shirts that said &quot; think outside the core. &quot; In 2006, the students placed their name-cards upside-down during the weeks where the workload was particularly demanding. [ 3 2 9 10 3 4 11 8 6 5 ] Courses are graded using letter grades and on the same five-point scale used throughout MIT. In its graduate programs, anything less than a 4.0 ( &quot; B &quot; ) average will not allow the student to graduate. Unlike most other leading business schools, MIT Sloan is consistent with MIT and does not offer any academic honors at graduation. The philosophy behind this is that the honor is in being an MIT graduate. MIT Sloan graduates wear the famous MIT class ring, known as the Brass Rat. MIT Sloan students and alumni informally call themselves Sloanies. A staple of MIT Sloan life is the weekly C-Function, which stands alternately for &quot; cultural function &quot; or &quot; consumption function &quot;. The school sponsors food and drink for all members of the MIT Sloan graduate community to enjoy entertainment organized by a specific campus cultural groups or clubs as well as parties with non-cultural themes. These functions are held on most Thursdays, often in the Walker Memorial building near the school. MIT Sloan alumni groups around the world also organize C-Functions for their club members, for social and networking activities. MIT Sloan closely collaborates with MIT&apos;s engineering, science, and economics programs, all of which are regularly ranked #1 in the world. MIT and Harvard University also collaborate, and students at each institution frequently pursue simultaneous graduate degrees at the other. In addition, MIT Sloan students can freely cross-register for courses at Harvard Business School, and vice versa, the only pair of leading business schools to have such an agreement. Some joint degree programs have been formalized between MIT Sloan and Harvard, including the Biomedical Enterprise Program with the Harvard-MIT Division of Health Sciences and Technology and a joint MBA/ MPP program with the Harvard Kennedy School. [ Programs ] MIT Sloan degrees are conferred at Killian Court, along with all other MIT degrees, at MIT commencement General degree programs MBA program Ph.D. program Undergraduate program Specialized degree programs Leaders for Global Operations program Master of Finance program Master of Science in Management Studies program System Design and Management program Executive programs Sloan Fellows program Executive MBA program Advanced Certificate for Executives in Management, Innovation, and Technology Executive Certificate in Technology, Operations, and Value Chain Management Executive Certificate in Management and Leadership Executive Certificate in Strategy and Innovation Walker Memorial, the site of MIT Sloan C-Functions and other special events Research centers MIT Entrepreneurship Center MIT Center for Digital Business MIT Center for Collective Intelligence MIT Laboratory for Information and Decision Systems MIT Center for Biomedical Innovation MIT Center for Computational Research &amp; Management Science MIT Center for Energy &amp; Environmental Policy Research MIT Center for Information Systems Research MIT Laboratory for Financial Engineering MIT Leadership Center MIT Operations Research Center MIT System Dynamics in Education Project [ Admission to the MBA program ] Key Admission Stats – MIT MBA: Average GPA of admits: 3.57 Average GMAT of admits: 718 Average Age of admits: 28 Admission to the MIT Sloan MBA program is very selective, with only 13% of the applicants pool being admitted. Candidates should keep in mind that the school is looking for people with drive and the ability to build long-term relationships, people who are setting goals and accomplishing them, and demonstrate leadership attributes in their actions.. In general, quantitative skills are very important to Sloan. One of the unique requirements of the application process is the cover letter, which asks the applicants to essentially apply for the job of business school. In it the applicant should guide the reader through the application and highlight his/her strengths, and share some of his/her goals and hopes for the time at Sloan and beyond. Another thing which is unique is the fact that the school does not required the TOEFL, but uses the verbal section of GMAT to analyze English proficiency. Admission requirements include resume, essays, two letters of recommendation, academic transcripts, and GMAT or GRE score. The MBA program has only 2 application rounds. [ Faculty ] { Nobel laureate } { Robert Solow, a faculty member since 1949 } Deans Erwin Schell, 1930–1951 (Department of Business and Engineering) Edward Pennell Brooks, 1951–1959 Howard W. Johnson, 1959–1966 Johnson, Howard Wesley, &apos;&apos;Holding the Center: Memoirs of a Life in Higher Education&apos;&apos;, MIT Press, 2001. ISBN 0-262-60044-7 William F. Pounds, 1966–1980 Abraham Siegel, 1980–1987 Lester Thurow, 1987–1993 Glen L. Urban, 1993–1998 Richard L. Schmalensee, 1998–2007 David Schmittlein, 2007–present Notable current and former faculty Thomas J. Allen, inventor, the Allen Curve Dan Ariely, author, Predictably Irrational Richard Beckhard, pioneer in organizational studies Warren Bennis, pioneer in leadership studies Fischer Black, co-inventor, Black–Scholes option pricing model Lael Brainard, Under Secretary, US Treasury Erik Brynjolfsson, director, MIT Center for Digital Business Randolph Cohen, leading expert on financial economics Paul Cootner, co-inventor, Random walk hypothesis John C. Cox, co-inventor, binomial options model Michael A. Cusumano, chairman, MIT Sloan Management Review Donald W. Davis, former CEO, Stanley Black &amp; Decker John J. Donovan, founder, Cambridge Technology Partners Rudi Dornbusch, inventor, the overshooting model Stanley Fischer, Governor, Bank of Israel Kristin Forbes, member, Council of Economic Advisers Jay Wright Forrester, inventor, System Dynamics Michael Hammer, inventor, business process reengineering John R. Hauser, co-founder, Marketing Science Jerry A. Hausman, 1985 John Bates Clark Medal recipient Bengt R. Holmström, leading expert on information asymmetry Thomas Kochan, leading expert on industrial relations Simon Johnson, former chief economist, IMF S. P. Kothari, editor, Journal of Accounting and Economics John Little, co-founder, Marketing Science Andrew Lo, inventor, Adaptive market hypothesis Peter Lorange, past president, IMD Stuart Madnick, inventor, Little Man Computer model Thomas W. Malone, co-founder, We Are Smarter Than Me Robert C. Merton, 1997 Nobel laureate in economics Douglas McGregor, inventor, Theory X and Theory Y Franco Modigliani, 1985 Nobel laureate in economics Kenneth Morse, co-founder, 3Com Stewart Myers, inventor, real option theory Wanda Orlikowski, creator, Practice Lens Eric Rosenfeld, Principal and Co-Founder of Long Term Capital Management Edward B. Roberts, chair, MIT Entrepreneurship Center Stephen Ross, inventor, arbitrage pricing theory Paul Samuelson, first American Nobel laureate in economics Edgar Schein, coined the term &quot; corporate culture &quot; Myron S. Scholes, 1997 Nobel laureate in economics Florence Sender, co-founder, MIT Entrepreneurship Center Peter Senge, author, The Fifth Discipline George P. Shultz, 60th United States Secretary of State Robert Solow, 1987 Nobel laureate in economics John Sterman, leading expert on System Dynamics Richard Thaler, inventor, the endowment effect Eric von Hippel, leading expert on user innovation Jack Welch, former CEO, General Electric Birger Wernerfelt, leading expert on organizational studies Li Xiaolin, CEO, China Power International Development [ Notable alumni ] [ 125 125 2 File:Mr._Kofi_Annan.jpg 7th UN Secretary-General, Kofi Annan File:CarlyFiorina49416.jpeg Former Hewlett-Packard CEO, Carly Fiorina File:MitchKapor.jpg Lotus Software founder, Mitch Kapor File:Mulally in Brazil.JPG Ford Motor Company CEO, Alan Mulally File:Benjamin Netanyahu portrait.jpg Prime Minister of Israel, Benjamin Netanyahu ] Magid Abraham, co-founder and CEO, comScore F. Duane Ackerman, former chairman and CEO, BellSouth Thad W. Allen, 23rd Commandant of the Coast Guard Kofi Annan, 7th Secretary-General of the United Nations Christopher C. Ashby, former US Ambassador to Uruguay Magdalena Barreiro, former Finance Minister, Ecuador Ellen Bard, member, Pennsylvania House of Representatives Eric Beinhocker, author, &quot; The Origin of Wealth &quot; W. Frank Blount, former CEO, Telstra Corporation Limited Ron Brenneman, CEO, Petro-Canada Daniel Carp, former chairman and CEO, Eastman Kodak Colby Chandler, former chairman and CEO, Eastman Kodak Robin Chase, co-founder, former CEO, Zipcar José Cisneros, treasurer, San Francisco Bill Ford, chairman, Ford Motor Company Vance D. Coffman, former CEO, Lockheed Martin Philip M. Condit, former chairman and CEO, Boeing Larry Constantine, inventor, modular programming Rafael del Pino Calvo-Sotelo, chairman, Ferrovial Susan Dudley, former head, Office of Management and Budget Carly Fiorina, former chairman and CEO, Hewlett Packard Donald V. Fites, former chairman and CEO, Caterpillar Inc. James C. Foster, CEO, Charles River Laboratories Gideon Gartner, founder and former CEO, Gartner Pavlos Geroulanos, Minister for Culture and Tourism, Greece Thomas P. Gerrity, former dean, Wharton School Sumantra Ghoshal, founding dean, Indian School of Business Adi Godrej, chairman, Godrej Group Bruce S. Gordon, president and CEO, NAACP Brian Halligan, co-founder and CEO, HubSpot Robert Hamada, former dean, Chicago Booth School of Business Daniel Hesse, president and CEO, Sprint Nextel Justin Jaschke, CEO, Verio Ploypailin Jensen, member of the Thai Royal Family Clay Johnson, deputy director, Office of Management and Budget Harvey Johnson, vice admiral, United States Coast Guard Yong Wook Jun, dean, SolBridge International School of Business Michael Kaiser, president, Kennedy Center Mitch Kapor, founder, Lotus Software, inventor, Lotus 1-2-3 Nancy Killefer, head, Washington, D.C. office, McKinsey &amp; Co. James Killian, 10th president, MIT Terry Jodok Kohler, CEO, Vollrath John Kotter, BusinessWeek #1 top leadership guru Joel Lamstein, co-founder, JSI Robert Lawrence Kuhn, host, Closer to Truth ( PBS ) Judy Lewent, CFO, Merck Nabiel Makarim, Minister of the Environment, Indonesia Jamie McCourt, former CEO, Los Angeles Dodgers Dennis Meadows, author, Limits to Growth D.R. Mehta, former chairman, SEBI Lorenzo Mendoza, chairman, Empresas Polar Victor Menezes, co-founder, American India Foundation Camila Merino, Minister of Labor, Chile Robert Metcalfe, co-founder, 3Com, inventor of Ethernet Henry Mintzberg, Fortune top management guru Chung Mong-joon, vice president, FIFA Daryl Morey, general manager, Houston Rockets Jon Moynihan, executive chairman, PA Consulting Group Alan Mulally, president and CEO, Ford Motor Company David Mullins, former vice-chairman, Federal Reserve Joseph Nacchio, chairman and CEO, Qwest Preetish Nijhawan, co-founder, Akamai Technologies Benjamin Netanyahu, 9th Prime Minister of Israel Nitin Nohria, dean, Harvard Business School Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala, managing director, World Bank Narendra Patni, founder and CEO, Patni Computer Systems Mark Pearlman, founding developer, Fox News Channel David Pekoske, former Vice Commandant of the Coast Guard Randal Pinkett, winner, The Apprentice, Season 4 Calie Pistorius, former principal, University of Pretoria William A. Porter, founder, E-Trade Tony Purnell, former principal, Jaguar Racing John E. Potter, 72nd United States Postmaster General Subramaniam Ramadorai, CEO, Tata Consultancy Services John S. Reed, former chairman and CEO, Citigroup Jaime Rosenthal, former Vice President of Honduras Kenan Sahin, founder and CEO, Kenan Systems Martha Samuelson, CEO, Analysis Group Richard Santagati, former president, Merrimack College Gerhard Schulmeyer, former CEO, Siemens AG Thilo Semmelbauer, president, Shutterstock Saul Shapiro, vice president, NYCEDC Hannes Smárason, former CEO, Stodir Herman R. Staudt, former Under Secretary of the Army Jeff Stibel, CEO, Web.com Robert A. Swanson, founder, Genentech Keiji Tachikawa, CEO, NTT DoCoMo Bill Taylor, co-founder, Fast Company Robert Thirsk, astronaut, International Space Station Stavros Thomadakis, chairman, HCMC John W. Thompson, chairman and CEO, Symantec José Tribolet, chairman, INESC Ronald L. Turner, CEO, Ceridian Corporation Milen Velchev, former Finance Minister, Bulgaria Ron Williams, CEO, Aetna Oliver E. Williamson, 2009 Nobel laureate in economics Thornton Wilson, former chairman and CEO, Boeing Robert Varkonyi, champion, 2002 World Series of Poker Carl Yankowski, former CEO, Palm Computing Elisabeth Zinser, former president, Southern Oregon University [ See also ] [ 2 ] MIT Entrepreneurship Center MIT Center for Digital Business MIT Center for Collective Intelligence MIT Sloan Management Review MIT Sloan Sports Analytics Conference MIT $100K Entrepreneurship Competition [ References ] [ 2 ] [ External links ] MIT Sloan School of Management Official Website MIT Sloan School of Management Course Materials on MIT OpenCourseWare Category:Business schools in Massachusetts Category:Massachusetts Institute of Technology Category:Educational institutions established in 1914 Category:Universities and colleges in Cambridge, Massachusetts de:MIT Sloan School of Management es:MIT Sloan School of Management fr:Sloan School of Management nl:MIT Sloan School of Management pt:MIT Sloan School of Management ru:MIT Sloan школа менеджмента zh:史隆管理學院