[ the philosophy an extremely unreasonable, silly, or foolish thing Absurdity absurdist humor surreal humour the literary genre Absurdist fiction ] In philosophy, &quot; the Absurd &quot; refers to the conflict between the human tendency to seek value and meaning in life and the human inability to find any. In this context absurd does not mean &quot; logically impossible, &quot; but rather &quot; humanly impossible. &quot; { Silentio, Johannes de, Fear and Trembling, Penguin Classics, p.  17 } The universe and the human mind do not each separately cause the Absurd, but rather, the Absurd arises by the contradictory nature of the two existing simultaneously. Absurdism, therefore, is a philosophical school of thought stating that the efforts of humanity to find inherent meaning will ultimately fail (and hence are absurd) because the sheer amount of information, including the vast unknown, makes certainty impossible. And yet, some absurdists (such as Camus [ May 2012 ] ) state that one should embrace mankind&apos;s absurd condition and continue exploring and searching for meaning. As a philosophy, absurdism also explores the fundamental nature of the Absurd and how individuals, once becoming conscious of the Absurd, should react to it. Absurdism is very closely related to existentialism and nihilism and has its origins in the 19th century Danish philosopher, Søren Kierkegaard, who chose to confront the crisis humans faced with the Absurd by developing existential philosophy. { Stewart, Jon (2011). Kierkegaard and Existentialism. Farnham, England: Ashgate. ISBN 978-1-4094-2641-7. p. 76-78. } Absurdism as a belief system was born of the European existentialist movement that ensued, specifically when the French Algerian philosopher and writer Albert Camus rejected certain aspects from that philosophical line of thought [ Solomon Robert C. Robert C. Solomon From Rationalism to Existentialism: The Existentialists and Their Nineteenth Century Backgrounds Rowman and Littlefield 2001 245 0-7425-1241-X ] and published his essay The Myth of Sisyphus. The aftermath of World War II provided the social environment that stimulated absurdist views and allowed for their popular development, especially in the devastated country of France. [ Brief description ] [ &quot;... in spite of or in defiance of the whole of existence he wills to be himself with it, to take it along, almost defying his torment. For to hope in the possibility of help, not to speak of help by virtue of the absurd, that for God all things are possible  – no, that he will not do. And as for seeking help from any other  – no, that he will not do for all the world; rather than seek help he would prefer to be himself  – with all the tortures of hell, if so it must be. &quot; 50% right ] In absurdist philosophy, the Absurd arises out of the fundamental disharmony between the individual&apos;s search for meaning and the apparent meaninglessness of the universe. As beings looking for meaning in a meaningless world, humans have three ways of resolving the dilemma. Kierkegaard and Camus describe the solutions in their works, The Sickness Unto Death (1849) and The Myth of Sisyphus (1942): Suicide (or, &quot; escaping existence &quot; ): a solution in which a person ends one&apos;s own life. Both Kierkegaard and Camus dismiss the viability of this option. Camus states that it does not counter the Absurd, but only becomes more absurd, to end one&apos;s own existence. Religious, spiritual, or abstract belief in a transcendent realm, being, or idea: a solution in which one believes in the existence of a reality that is beyond the Absurd, and, as such, has meaning. Kierkegaard stated that a belief in anything beyond the Absurd requires a non-rational but perhaps necessary religious acceptance in such an intangible and empirically unprovable thing (now commonly referred to as a &quot; leap of faith &quot; ). However, Camus regarded this solution, and others, as &quot; philosophical suicide &quot;. [ Kierkegaard Søren Søren Kierkegaard The Sickness Unto Death Princeton University Press 1941 ] Acceptance of the Absurd: a solution in which one accepts the Absurd and continues to live in spite of it. Camus endorsed this solution, believing that by accepting the Absurd, one can achieve absolute freedom, and that by recognizing no religious or other moral constraints and by revolting against the Absurd while simultaneously accepting it as unstoppable, one could possibly be content from the personal meaning constructed in the process. Kierkegaard, on the other hand, regarded this solution as &quot; demoniac madness &quot; : &quot; He rages most of all at the thought that eternity might get it into its head to take his misery from him! &quot;, Part I, Ch. 3. [ Relationship with existentialism and nihilism ] [ December 2009 ] (Simplified) Relationship between existentialism, absurdism and nihilism Atheistic existentialism Absurdism Nihilism Theistic existentialism 1. There is such a thing as meaning or value Yes Maybe No Yes 2. There is inherent meaning in the universe (either intrinsic or from God) No Maybe, but humans can never know it No Maybe, but humans must have faith to believe there is 3. Individuals can create meaning in life themselves Yes, it is essential that they do Yes, but it must face the Absurd and it must be individual by the &quot; absurd creation &quot; in order to have meaning and sense No, because there is no such meaning to create Yes, but that meaning must incorporate God 4. The pursuit of gaining intrinsic or extrinsic meaning in the universe is possible No, and the pursuit itself is meaningless Maybe, and the pursuit itself may have meaning No, and the pursuit itself is meaningless Yes, and the pursuit itself may have meaning 5. The pursuit of constructed meaning is possible Yes, thus the goal of existentialism Yes, but there is no way to verify whether one&apos;s constructed meaning conforms to the intrinsic or extrinsic meaning of the universe No Yes, thus the goal of existentialism 6. There is resolution to the individual&apos;s desire to seek meaning Yes, the creation of one&apos;s own meaning Yes, but it is based on the individual&apos;s personal meaning since it&apos;s impossible to know the inherent meaning in the universe (if one exists) No Yes, the creation of one&apos;s own meaning before God [ Related works by Søren Kierkegaard ] [ Philosophy of Søren Kierkegaard ] { despair. Absurdist philosophy fits into the &apos;despair of defiance&apos; rubric. Kierkegaard, Søren. The Sickness Unto Death. Kierkegaard wrote about all four viewpoints in his works at one time or another, but the majority of his work leaned towards what would later become absurdist and theistic existentialist views. } A century before Camus, the 19th century Danish philosopher Søren Kierkegaard wrote extensively on the absurdity of the world. In his journals, Kierkegaard writes about the absurd: [ What is the Absurd? It is, as may quite easily be seen, that I, a rational being, must act in a case where my reason, my powers of reflection, tell me: you can just as well do the one thing as the other, that is to say where my reason and reflection say: you cannot act and yet here is where I have to act... The Absurd, or to act by virtue of the absurd, is to act upon faith... I must act, but reflection has closed the road so I take one of the possibilities and say: This is what I do, I cannot do otherwise because I am brought to a standstill by my powers of reflection. Dru, Alexander. The Journals of Søren Kierkegaard, Oxford University Press, 1938. Kierkegaard, Søren Journals 1849 ] Here is another example of the absurd from his writings: [ What, then, is the absurd? The absurd is that the eternal truth has come into existence in time, that God has come into existence, has been born, has grown up. etc., has come into existence exactly as an individual human being, indistinguishable from any other human being, inasmuch as all immediate recognizability is pre-Socratic paganism and from the Jewish point of view is idolatry. Kierkegaard, Concluding Unscientific Postscript, Hong 1992, p. 210 ] How can this absurdity be held or believed? Kierkegaard says: [ I gladly undertake, by way of brief repetition, to emphasize what other pseudonyms have emphasized. The absurd is not the absurd or absurdities without any distinction (wherefore Johannes de Silentio: &quot; How many of our age understand what the absurd is? &quot; ). The absurd is a category, and the most developed thought is required to define the Christian absurd accurately and with conceptual correctness. The absurd is a category, the negative criterion, of the divine or of the relationship to the divine. When the believer has faith, the absurd is not the absurd — faith transforms it, but in every weak moment it is again more or less absurd to him. The passion of faith is the only thing which masters the absurd — if not, then faith is not faith in the strictest sense, but a kind of knowledge. The absurd terminates negatively before the sphere of faith, which is a sphere by itself. To a third person the believer relates himself by virtue of the absurd; so must a third person judge, for a third person does not have the passion of faith. Johannes de Silentio has never claimed to be a believer; just the opposite, he has explained that he is not a believer — in order to illuminate faith negatively. Journals of Soren KierkegaardX6B 79 The link to the Journal entries: http://www.naturalthinker.net/trl/texts/Kierkegaard,Soren/JournPapers/X_6_B.html ] An example that Kierkegaard uses is found in one of his famous works, Fear and Trembling. In the story of Abraham in the Book of Genesis, Abraham was told by God to kill his son Isaac. Just as Abraham was about to kill Isaac, an angel stopped Abraham from doing so. Kierkegaard believes that through virtue of the absurd, Abraham, defying all reason and ethical duties ( &quot; you cannot act &quot; ), got back his son and reaffirmed his faith ( &quot; where I have to act &quot; ). { Silentio, Johannes de. Fear and Trembling, Denmark, 1843 } However, it should be noted that in this particular case, the work was signed with the pseudonym Johannes de Silentio. Another instance of absurdist themes in Kierkegaard&apos;s work is found in The Sickness Unto Death, which is signed by the pseudonym Anti-Climacus. In his examination of the forms of despair, Kierkegaard examines the type of despair known as defiance. { Sickness Unto Death, Ch.3, part B, sec. 2 } In the opening quotation reproduced at the beginning of the article, Kierkegaard describes how such a man would endure such a defiance and identifies the three major traits of the Absurd Man, later discussed by Albert Camus: a rejection of escaping existence (suicide), a rejection of help from a higher power and acceptance of his absurd (and despairing) condition. According to Kierkegaard in his autobiography The Point of View of My Work as an Author, most of his pseudonymous writings are not necessarily reflective of his own opinions. Nevertheless, his work anticipated many absurdist themes and provided its theoretical background. [ Albert Camus ] Although the notion of the &apos;absurd&apos; is pervasive in all of the literature of Albert Camus, The Myth of Sisyphus is his chief work on the subject. In it, Camus considers absurdity as a confrontation, an opposition, a conflict or a &quot; divorce &quot; between two ideals. Specifically, he defines the human condition as absurd, as the confrontation between man&apos;s desire for significance, meaning and clarity on the one hand  – and the sile nt, cold universe on the other. He continues that there are specific human experiences evoking notions of absurdity. Such a realization or encounter with the absurd leaves the individual with a choice: suicide, a leap of faith, or recognition. He concludes that recognition is the only defensible option. [ Camus Albert Albert Camus Myth of Sisyphus and Other Essays Vintage Books 0-679-73373-6 1991 ] For Camus, suicide is a &quot; confession &quot; that life is not worth living; it is a choice implicitly declaring that life is &quot; too much. &quot; Suicide offers the most basic &quot; way out &quot; of absurdity: the immediate termination of the self and its place in the universe. The absurd encounter can also arouse a &quot; leap of faith, &quot; a term derived from one of Kierkegaard&apos;s early pseudonyms, Johannes de Silentio (although the term was not used by Kierkegaard himself), { &quot; The Kierkegaardian Leap &quot; in The Cambridge Companion to Kierkegaard. } where one believes that there is more than the rational life (aesthetic or ethical). To take a &quot; leap of faith, &quot; one must act with the &quot; virtue of the absurd &quot; (as Johannes de Silentio put it), where a suspension of the ethical may need to exist. This faith has no expectations, but is a flexible power initiated by a recognition of the absurd. (Although at some point, one recognizes or encounters the existence of the Absurd and, in response, actively ignores it.) However, Camus states that because the leap of faith escapes rationality and defers to abstraction over personal experience, the leap of faith is not absurd. Camus considers the leap of faith as &quot; philosophical suicide, &quot; rejecting both this and physical suicide. { Ibid. p.41 } Lastly, a person can choose to embrace his or her own absurd condition. According to Camus, one&apos;s freedom  – and the opportunity to give life meaning  – lies in the recognition of absurdity. If the absurd experience is truly the realization that the universe is fundamentally devoid of absolutes, then we as individuals are truly free. &quot; To live without appeal, &quot; { Ibid. p.55 } as he puts it, is a philosophical move to define absolutes and universals subjectively, rather than objectively. The freedom of humans is thus established in a human&apos;s natural ability and opportunity to create his own meaning and purpose; to decide (or think) for him- or herself. The individual becomes the most precious unit of existence, as he or she represents a set of unique ideals which can be characterized as an entire universe in its own right. In acknowledging the absurdity of seeking any inherent meaning, but continuing this search regardless, one can be happy, gradually developing his or her own meaning from the search alone. Camus states in The Myth of Sisyphus: &quot; Thus I draw from the absurd three consequences, which are my revolt, my freedom, and my passion. By the mere activity of consciousness I transform into a rule of life what was an invitation to death, and I refuse suicide. &quot; { Ibid. p.64 } &quot; Revolt &quot; here refers to the refusal of suicide and search for meaning despite the revelation of the Absurd; &quot; Freedom &quot; refers to the lack of imprisonment by religious devotion or others&apos; moral codes; &quot; Passion &quot; refers to the most wholehearted experiencing of life, since hope has been rejected, and so it is concluded that every moment be lived fully. [ The meaning of life ] According to absurdism, humans historically attempt to find meaning in their lives. Traditionally, this search results in one of two conclusions: either that life is meaningless, or life contains within it a purpose set forth by a higher power - a belief in God, or adherence to some religion or other abstract concept. [ Elusion ] Camus perceives filling the void with some invented belief or meaning as a mere &quot; act of eluding &quot; —that is, avoiding or escaping rather than acknowledging and embracing the Absurd. To Camus, elusion is a fundamental flaw in religion, existentialism (Atheist existentialism however does not include &quot; Elusion &quot; ), and various other schools of thought. If the individual eludes the Absurd, then he or she can never confront it. [ God ] Even with a spiritual power as the answer to meaning, another question arises: What is the purpose of God? Kierkegaard believed that there is no human-comprehensible purpose of God, making faith in God absurd itself. Camus on the other hand states that to believe in God is to &quot; deny one of the terms of the contradiction &quot; between humanity and the universe (and therefore not absurd), but is what he calls &quot; philosophical suicide &quot;. Camus (as well as Kierkegaard), though, suggests that while absurdity does not lead to belief in God, neither does it lead to the denial of God. Camus notes, &quot; I did not say &apos;excludes God&apos;, which would still amount to asserting &quot;. { Myth of Sisyphus, p. 40, note 7 } [ Personal meaning ] For Camus, it is the beauty which people encounter in life that makes it worth living. People may create meaning in their own lives, which may not be the objective meaning of life (if there is one), but can still provide something for which to strive. However, he insisted that one must always maintain an ironic distance between this invented meaning and the knowledge of the absurd, lest the fictitious meaning take the place of the absurd. [ Freedom ] Freedom cannot be achieved beyond what the absurdity of existence permits; however, the closest one can come to being absolutely free is through acceptance of the Absurd. Camus introduced the idea of &quot; acceptance without resignation &quot; as a way of dealing with the recognition of absurdity, asking whether or not man can &quot; live without appeal &quot;, while defining a &quot; conscious revolt &quot; against the avoidance of absurdity of the world. In a world devoid of higher meaning or judicial afterlife, the human being becomes as close to absolutely free as is humanly possible. [ Hope ] The rejection of hope, in absurdism, denotes the refusal to believe in anything more than what this absurd life provides. Hope, Camus emphasizes, however, has nothing to do with despair (meaning that the two terms are not opposite s ). One can still live fully while rejecting hope, and, in fact, can only do so without hope. Hope is perceived by the absurdist as another fraudulent method of evading the Absurd, and by not having hope, one will be motivated to live every fleeting moment to the fullest. [ Integrity ] The absurdist is not guided by morality, but rather, by his or her own integrity. The absurdist is, in fact, amoral (though not necessarily immoral ). Morality implies an unwavering sense of definite right and wrong at all times, while integrity implies honesty with one&apos;s self and consistency in the motivations of one&apos;s actions and decisions. [ See also ] [ Philosophy ] Absurdist fiction Discordianism Existential nihilism Existentialism Lottery of birth Nihilism Non sequitur (literary device) Pataphysics Peter Wessel Zapffe The Stranger (novel) Theatre of the Absurd [ References ] [ May 2010 ] [ 2 ] [ Further reading ] OBERIU, edited by Eugene Ostashevsky. Northwestern 2005 ISBN 0-8101-2293-6 Thomas Nagel : Mortal Questions, 1991. ISBN 0-521-40676-5 [ External links ] Fiction of the Absurd Absurdist Monthly Review Magazine Gone Lawn Excavation Project : active absurdist and related authors The New Absurdist Category:Existentialist concepts Category:Nihilism Category:Metaphysical theories Category:Philosophy of life ar:عبثية az:Absurdizm ca:Filosofia de l&apos;absurd ceb:Absurdismo cs:Absurdno da:Absurd (filosofi) de:Absurdität et:Absurd es:Filosofía del absurdo fa:هیچ‌انگاری fr:Absurde hr:Besmislica id:Absurdisme he:אבסורד jv:Absurdisme ka:აბსურდი nl:Absurdisme ja:不条理 no:Absurdisme nn:Absurdisme uz:Absurdizm pl:Absurdyzm pt:Absurdismo ro:Absurd ru:Абсурдизм simple:Absurdism sk:Absurdno fi:Absurdismi tr:Absürdizm tk:Absurd uk:Абсурдизм zh:荒謬