In bioinformatics, the term sequence analysis refers to the process of subjecting a DNA, RNA or peptide sequence to any of a wide range of analytical methods to understand its features, function, structure, or evolution. Methodologies used include sequence alignment, searches against biological database s, and others. Since the development of methods of high-throughput production of gene and protein sequences, the rate of addition of new sequences to the databases increased exponentially. Such a collection of sequences does not, by itself, increase the scientist&apos;s understanding of the biology of organisms. However, comparing these new sequences to those with known functions is a key way of understanding the biology of an organism from which the new sequence comes. Thus, sequence analysis can be used to assign function to genes and proteins by the study of the similarities between the compared sequences. Nowadays, there are many tools and techniques that provide the sequence comparisons (sequence alignment) and analyze the alignment product to understand its biology. Sequence analysis in molecular biology includes a very wide range of relevant topics: The comparison of sequences in order to find similarity often to infer if they are related ( homologous ) Identification of intrinsic features of the sequence such as active site s, post translational modification sites, gene-structures, reading frame s, distributions of intron s and exon s and regulatory elements Identification of sequence differences and variations such as point mutation s and single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in order to get the genetic marker. Revealing the evolution and genetic diversity of sequences and organisms Identification of molecular structure from sequence alone In chemistry, sequence analysis comprises techniques used to do determine the sequence of a polymer formed of several monomer s.In molecular biology and genetics, the same process is called simply &quot; sequencing &quot;. In marketing, sequence analysis is often used in analytical customer relationship management applications, such as NPTB models (Next Product to Buy). [ History ] Since the very first sequences of the insulin protein was characterised by Fred Sanger in 1951 biologists have been trying to use this knowledge to understand the function of molecules. [ SANGER F, TUPPY H The amino-acid sequence in the phenylalanyl chain of insulin. I. The identification of lower peptides from partial hydrolysates Biochem. J. 49 4 463–81 1951 September 14886310 1197535 ] [ SANGER F, TUPPY H The amino-acid sequence in the phenylalanyl chain of insulin. 2. The investigation of peptides from enzymic hydrolysates Biochem. J. 49 4 481–90 1951 September 14886311 1197536 ] [ Sequence Alignment ] [ Sequence_alignment#Pairwise_alignment ] [ Multiple sequence alignment ] Example multiple sequence alignment There are millions of protein and nucleotide sequences known. These sequences fall into many groups of related sequences known as protein families or gene families. Relationships between these sequences are usually discovered by aligning them together and assigning this alignment a score. There are two main types of sequence alignment. Pair-wise sequence alignment only compares two sequences at a time and multiple sequence alignment compares many sequences in one go. Two important algorithms for aligning pairs of sequences are the Needleman-Wunsch algorithm and the Smith-Waterman algorithm. Popular tools for sequence alignment include: Pair-wise alignment - BLAST Multiple alignment - ClustalW, PROBCONS, MUSCLE, MAFFT, and T-Coffee. A common use for pairwise sequence alignment is to take a sequence of interest and compare it to all known sequences in a database to identify homologous sequences. In general the matches in the database are ordered to show the most closely related sequences first followed by sequences with diminishing similarity. These matches are usually reported with a measure of statistical significance such as an Expectation value. [ Profile comparison ] In 1987 Michael Gribskov, Andrew McLachlan and David Eisenberg introduced the method of profile comparison for identifying distant similarities between proteins. [ Gribskov M, McLachlan AD, Eisenberg D Profile analysis: detection of distantly related proteins Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 84 13 4355–8 1987 July 3474607 305087 10.1073/pnas.84.13.4355 ] Rather than using a single sequence, profile methods use a multiple sequence alignment to encode a profile which contains information about the conservation level of each residue. These profiles can then be used to search collections of sequences to find sequences that are related. Profiles are also known as Position Specific Scoring Matrices (PSSMs). In 1993 a probabilistic interpretation of profiles was introduced by David Haussler and colleagues using hidden Markov models. [ Brown M, Hughey R, Krogh A, Mian IS, Sjölander K, Haussler D Using Dirichlet mixture priors to derive hidden Markov models for protein families Proc Int Conf Intell Syst Mol Biol 1 47–55 1993 7584370 ] [ Krogh A, Brown M, Mian IS, Sjölander K, Haussler D Hidden Markov models in computational biology. Applications to protein modeling J. Mol. Biol. 235 5 1501–31 1994 February 8107089 10.1006/jmbi.1994.1104 ] These models have become known as profile-HMMs. In recent years methods have been developed that allow the comparison of profiles directly to each other. These are known as profile-profile comparison methods. [ Ye X, Wang G, Altschul SF An assessment of substitution scores for protein profile-profile comparison Bioinformatics 27 24 3356–63 2011 December 21998158 10.1093/bioinformatics/btr565 ] [ Sequence assembly ] [ Sequence assembly ] Sequence assembly refers to the reconstruction of a DNA sequence by aligning and merging small DNA fragments. It is an integral part of modern DNA sequencing. Since presently-available DNA sequencing technologies are ill-suited for reading long sequences, large pieces of DNA (such as genomes) are often sequenced by (1) cutting the DNA into small pieces, (2) reading the small fragments, and (3) reconstituting the original DNA by merging the information on various fragment. [ Gene prediction ] [ Gene prediction ] Gene prediction or gene finding refers to the process of identifying the regions of genomic DNA that encode genes. This includes protein-coding gene s as well as RNA gene s, but may also include prediction of other functional elements such as regulatory regions. Gene finding is one of the first and most important steps in understanding the genome of a species once it has been sequenced. In general the prediction of bacterial genes is significantly simpler and more accurate than the prediction of genes in eukaryotic species that usually have complex intron / exon patterns. [ Protein Structure Prediction ] [ Threading (protein sequence) ] right The 3D structures of molecules are of great importance to their functions in nature. Since structural prediction of large molecules at an atomic level is largely intractable problem, some biologists introduced ways to predict 3D structure at a primary sequence level. This includes biochemical or statistical analysis of amino acid residues in local regions and structural inference from homologs (or other potentially related proteins) with known 3D structures. There have been a large number of diverse approaches to solve the structure prediction problem. In order to determine which methods were most effective a structure prediction competition was founded called CASP (Critical Assessment of Structure Prediction). [ Moult J, Hubbard T, Bryant SH, Fidelis K, Pedersen JT Critical assessment of methods of protein structure prediction (CASP): round II Proteins Suppl 1 2–6 1997 9485489 ] [ Methodology ] The tasks that lie in the space of sequence analysis are often non-trivial to resolve and require the use of relatively complex approaches. Of the many types of methods used in practice, the most popular include: Dynamic programming Artificial Neural Network Hidden Markov Model Support Vector Machine Clustering Bayesian Network Regression Analysis Sequence mining [ See also ] List of sequence alignment software List of alignment visualization software List of phylogenetics software List of phylogenetic tree visualization software List of protein structure prediction software List of RNA structure prediction software [ References ] Category:Bioinformatics de:DNA-Sequenzanalyse fa:آنالیز دنباله nl:Sequentieanalyse simple:Sequence analysis sr:Analiza sekvenci tr:Dizi analizi zh:序列分析