A submersible pump (or electric submersible pump (ESP)) is a device which has a hermetically sealed motor close-coupled to the pump body. The whole assembly is submerged in the fluid to be pumped. The main advantage of this type of pump is that it prevents pump cavitation, a problem associated with a high elevation difference between pump and the fluid surface. Submersible pumps push fluid to the surface as opposed to jet pumps having to pull fluids. Submersibles are more efficient than jet pumps. [ Working principle ] ESP systems are effective for pumping produced fluids to surface. The submersible pumps used in ESP installations are multistage centrifugal pumps operating in a vertical position. Although their constructionaland operational features underwent a continuous evolution over the years, their basic operational principle remained the same. Produced liquids, after being subjected to great centrifugal forces caused by the high rotational speed of the impeller, lose their kinetic energy in the diffuser where a conversion of kinetic to pressure energy takes place. This is the main operational mechanism of radial and mixed flow pumps. The pump shaft is connected to the gas separator or the protector by a mechanical coupling at the bottom of the pump. Well fluidsenter the pump through an intake screen and are lifted by the pump stages.Other parts include the radial bearings (bushings) distributed along thelength of the shaft providing radial support to the pump shaft turning at high rotational speeds. An optional thrust bearing takes up part of the axial forces arising in the pump but most of those forces are absorbed by the protector’s thrust bearing. [ Applications ] Submersible pumps are found in many applications. Single stage pumps are used for drainage, sewage pumping, general industrial pumping and slurry pumping. They are also popular with aquarium filters. Multiple stage submersible pumps are typically lowered down a borehole and used for water abstraction, water well s and in oil well s. Special attention to the type of ESP is required when using certain types of liquids. ESP&apos;s commonly used on board naval vessels cannot be used to dewater contaminated flooded spaces. These use a 440 volt A/C motor that operates a small centrifugal pump. It can also be used out of the water, taking suction with a 2-1/2  inch non-collapsible hose. The pumped liquid is circulated around the motor for cooling purposes. There is a possibility that the gasoline will leak into the pump causing a fire or destroying the pump, so hot water and flammable liquids should be avoided. [ ESP usage in oil wells ] Submersible pumps are used in oil production to provide a relatively efficient form of &quot; artificial lift &quot;, able to operate across a broad range of flow rates and depths. { Lyons (ed), &apos;&apos;Standard Handbook of Petroleum &amp; Natural Gas Engineering &quot;, p.  662 } { Other forms of artificial lift include } { Gas Lift, } { Beam Pumping, } { Plunger Lift and } { Progressive cavity pump. } By decreasing the pressure at the bottom of the well (by lowering bottomhole flowing pressure, or increasing drawdown), significantly more oil can be produced from the well when compared with natural production. [ November 2009 ] The pumps are typically electrically powered and referred to as Electrical Submersible Pumps (ESP). [ November 2009 ] ESP systems consist of both surface components (housed in the production facility, for example an oil platform ) and sub-surface components (found in the well hole). Surface components include the motor controller (often a variable speed controller), surface cables and transformers. Subsurface components typically include the pump, motor, seal and cables. A gas separator is sometimes installed. The pump itself is a multi-stage unit with the number of stages being determined by the operating requirements. Each stage consists of a driven impeller and a diffuser which directs flow to the next stage of the pump. Pumps come in diameters from 90mm (3.5  inches) to 254mm (10  inches) and vary between [ 1 m ft 0 ] and [ 8.7 m ft 0 ] in length. The motor used to drive the pump is typically a three phase, squirrel cage induction motor, with a nameplate power rating in the range 7.5  kW to 560  kW (at 60 Hz). New varieties of ESP can include a water/oil separator which permits the water to be reinjected into the reservoir without the need to lift it to the surface. There are at least 15 brands of oilfield esps used throughout the world. Until recently, ESPs had been highly costly to install due to the requirement of an electric cable downhole. This cable had to be wrapped around jointed tubing and connected at each joint. New coiled tubing umbilical s allow for both the piping and electric cable to deployed with a single conventional coiled tubing unit. The ESP system consists of a number of components that turn a staged series of centrifugal pumps to increase the pressure of the well fluid and push it to the surface. The energy to turn the pump comes from a high-voltage (3 to 5 kV) alternating-current source to drive a special motor that can work at high temperatures of up to [ 300 °F °C ] and high pressures of up to [ 5000 psi MPa on ], from deep wells of up to [ 12000 ft km ] deep with high energy requirements of up to about 1000 horsepower (750  kW). ESPs have dramatically lower efficiencies with significant fractions of gas, greater than about 10% volume at the pump intake. Given their high rotational speed of up to 4000 rpm (67 Hz) and tight clearances, they are not very tolerant of solids such as sand. [ See also ] Centrifugal pump Eductor-jet pump Oil well Sewage pumping [ References ] [ Standard Handbook of Petroleum &amp; Natural Gas Engineering 2 William C. Lyons 6 Gulf Professional Publishing 1996 0-88415-643-5 ] [ External links ] Water well pump article &apos;&apos;Versatile Pump Works Under Water&apos;&apos;, July 1947, Popular Science excellent cutaway drawing of large public water works submersible pump design [ Submersible pumps ] Category:Pumps Category:Irrigation Category:Oil wells af:Dompelpomp de:Tauchpumpe es:Bomba sumergible mk:Потопна пумпа nl:Dompelpomp ru:ЭЦН sv:Sänkbar pump uk:Заглибний насос