[ 1857 6 2 y ] { Roholte vicarage at } { Præstø, Denmark } [ 1919 10 13 1857 6 2 y ] { Klotzsche, Germany } { Danish } [ Nobel Prize in Literature 1917 ] { (shared) } Karl Gjellerup (June 2, 1857 – October 13, 1919) was a Danish poet and novelist who together with his compatriot Henrik Pontoppidan won the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1917. He belonged to the Modern Break-Through. He occasionally used the pseudonym Epigonos. Gjellerup was the son of a vicar in Zealand and grew up in a national and romantic idealistic atmosphere. In the 1870s he broke with his background and at first he became an enthusiastic supporter of the naturalist movement and Georg Brandes, writing audacious novels about free love and atheism. Strongly influenced by his origin he gradually left the Brandes line and 1885 he broke totally with the naturalists, becoming a new romanticist. A central trace of his life was his Germanophile attitude, he felt himself strongly attracted to German culture (his wife was a German) and 1892 he finally settled in Germany, which made him unpopular in Denmark on both the right and left wing. As years passed he totally identified with the German Empire, including its war aims 1914-18. Among the early works of Gjellerup must be mentioned his most important novel Germanernes Lærling (1882, i.e. The Learner of German), a partly autobiographic tale of the development of a young man from being a conformist theologian to a pro-German atheist and intellectual, and Minna (1889), on the surface, a love story but more of a study in woman&apos;s psychology. Some Wagnerian dramas show his growing romanticist interests. An important work is the novel Møllen (1896, i. e. The Mill), a sinister melodrama of love and jealousy. [ Later years ] In his last years he was clearly influenced by Buddhism and Oriental culture. His critically acclaimed work Der Pilger Kamanita/Pilgrimen Kamanita (1906, i.e. The Pilgrim Kamanita) has been called &apos;one of the oddest novels written in Danish&apos;. It features the journey of Kamanita, an Indian merchant&apos;s son, from earthly prosperity and carnal romance, through the ups and downs of the world&apos;s way, a chance meeting with a stranger monk (who, unbeknownst to Kamanita, was actually Gautama Buddha ), death, and reincarnation towards nirvana. In Thailand, which is a Buddhist country, The Pilgrim Kamanita is on the school programme. Den fuldendtes hustru (1907, i.e. The wife of the perfect) is a versified drama, inspired by Dante &apos;s Divine Comedy, about Buddha &apos;s earthly life as Siddharta, being inhibited in his spiritual efforts by his wife, Yasodhara. The giant novel Verdensvandrerne (1910, i.e. The world roamers) takes its contemporary starting point in a German female academic on a study tour in India, but evolves across chronological levels, in which characters re-experience what has happened in former eon s, thus featuring souls roaming from one incarnation to another. Rudolph Stens Landpraksis (1913, i.e. The country practice of [physician] Rudolph Sten) is set in the rural Zealand of Gjellerup&apos;s youth. The main character develops from a liberal, superficial outlook on life, including youthful romantical conflicts, through years of reflection and asketic devotion to duty towards a more mature standpoint, hinting at the author&apos;s own course of life. Das heiligste Tier (1919, i.e. The holiest animal) was Gjellerup&apos;s last work. Having elements of self-parody, it is regarded as his only attempt at humour. It is a peculiar mythological satire in which animals arrive at their own Elysium after death. These include the snake that killed Cleopatra, Odysseus &apos; dog Argos, Wisvamitra (the holy cow of India), the donkey of Jesus and the horses of various historical commanders in field. The assembly select, after discussion, Buddha&apos;s horse Kantaka as the holiest of animals, but it has left without a trace to follow its master to nirvana. [ Aftermath ] In Denmark, Gjellerup&apos;s Nobel award was received with little enthusiasm. He had long been regarded as a German writer. During various stages of his career, he had made himself unpopular with both the naturalist left surrounding Georg Brandes and the conservative right. His nomination for the Nobel award was, however, supported from Danish side for several times. Because Sweden was neutral during World War I, the divided prize did not arouse political speculations about partial decision, but showed on the other hand allegiance between the Nordic neighbors. Today Gjellerup is almost forgotten in Denmark. In spite of this, however, literary historians normally regard him as an honest seeker after truth. Gjellerup&apos;s works have been translated into several languages, including German (often translated by himself), Swedish, English, Dutch, Polish, Thai and others [ April 2011 ]. The Pilgrim Kamanita is his most widely translated book, having been published in several European countries and the United States [ April 2011 ]. In Thailand, a Buddhist country, the first half of the Thai translation of Kamanita have been used in secondary school textbooks [ April 2011 ]. [ Biographies ] Georg Nørregård: Karl Gjellerup - en biografi, 1988 (in Danish) Olaf C. Nybo: Karl Gjellerup - ein literarischer Grenzgänger des Fin-de-siècle, 2002 (in German) Article in Vilhelm Andersen: Illustreret dansk Litteraturhistorie, 1924-34 (in Danish) Article in Hakon Stangerup: Dansk litteraturhistorie, 1964-66 (in Danish) [ External links ] [ OL5258002A ] [ Karl_Adolph_Gjellerup Karl Adolph Gjellerup ] [ 14962 Der Pilger Kamanita by Karl Adolph Gjellerup ] Karl Gjellerup, Timeline of Nobel Winners, brainparad.com Knud B. Gjesing: &apos;&apos;Karl Gjellerup&apos;&apos;, portrait of the author, Archive for Danish Literature, Danish Royal Library (in Danish) (pdf) [ 116618868 n/88/261579 59326059 188293 ] [ Gjellerup, Karl Adolp June 2, 1857 Roholte vicarage at Præstø, Denmark October 13, 1919 Klotzsche, Germany ] Category:1857 births Category:1919 deaths Category:People from Faxe Municipality Category:Danish novelists Category:Danish poets Category:Danish Nobel laureates Category:Nobel laureates in Literature ar:كارل غيلوروب an:Karl Adolph Gjellerup az:Karl Adolf Gellerup zh-min-nan:Karl Gjellerup be:Карл Адольф Г&apos;елеруп be-x-old:Карл Г&apos;елеруп bg:Карл Гелеруп br:Karl Adolph Gjellerup ca:Karl Adolph Gjellerup cs:Karl Adolph Gjellerup da:Karl Gjellerup de:Karl Gjellerup et:Karl Gjellerup es:Karl Adolph Gjellerup eo:Karl Gjellerup fa:کارل آدولف گیلروپ fr:Karl Adolph Gjellerup gd:Karl Adolph Gjellerup gl:Karl Gjellerup ko:카를 아돌프 기엘레루프 hi:कार्ल एडाल्फ जेलेरप hr:Karl Adolph Gjellerup io:Karl Adolph Gjellerup ilo:Karl Adolph Gjellerup id:Karl Gjellerup it:Karl Adolph Gjellerup he:קרל גילרופ ka:კარლ ადოლფ გელერუპი sw:Karl Adolph Gjellerup ku:Karl Gjellerup la:Carolus Adolphus Gjellerup lt:Karl Adolph Gjellerup hu:Karl Adolph Gjellerup nl:Karl Adolph Gjellerup ja:カール・ギェレルプ no:Karl Adolph Gjellerup nn:Karl Gjellerup oc:Karl Adolph Gjellerup pnb:کارل گیلورپ pms:Karl Gjellerup pl:Karl Gjellerup pt:Karl Adolph Gjellerup ro:Karl Gjellerup ru:Гьеллеруп, Карл Адольф sk:Karl Adolph Gjellerup sr:Карл Адолф Гјелеруп fi:Karl Adolph Gjellerup sv:Karl Gjellerup th:คาร์ล อดอล์ฟ เจลเลอร์รุป tr:Karl Adolph Gjellerup uk:Карл Адольф Г&apos;єллеруп vi:Karl Gjellerup yo:Karl Adolph Gjellerup zh:卡尔·阿道夫·盖勒鲁普