[ 625 10 25 y ] { ??? } { Boniface } Pope Boniface V (died 25 October 625) was pope from 619 to 625. He was consecrated as pope on 23 December 619. He did much for the Christianising of England and enacted the decree by which churches became places of refuge for criminals. Boniface V was a Neapolitan who succeeded Pope Adeodatus I after a vacancy of more than a year. Before his consecration, Italy was disturbed by the rebellion of the eunuch Eleutherius, Exarch of Ravenna. The patrician pretender advanced towards Rome, but before he could reach the city, he was slain by his own troops. The Liber Pontificalis records that Boniface made certain enactments relative to the rights of sanctuary, and that he ordered the ecclesiastical notaries to obey the laws of the empire on the subject of wills. He also prescribed that acolyte s should not presume to translate the relics of martyrs and that, in the Basilica di San Giovanni in Laterano, they should not take the place of deacon s in administering baptism. Boniface completed and consecrated the cemetery of Saint Nicomedes on the Via Nomentana. In the Liber Pontificalis, Boniface is described as &quot; the mildest of men &quot;, whose chief distinction was his great love for the clergy. The Venerable Bede writes of the pope&apos;s affectionate concern for the English Church. The &quot; letters of exhortation &quot; which he is said to have addressed to Mellitus, Archbishop of Canterbury, and to Justus, Bishop of Rochester, are no longer extant, but certain other letters of his have been preserved. One is written to Justus after he had succeeded Mellitus as Archbishop of Canterbury in 624, conferring the pallium upon him and directing him to &quot; ordain bishops as occasion should require. &quot; According to Bede, Pope Boniface also sent letters to King Edwin of Northumbria in 625 urging him to embrace the Christian faith, and to the Christian Princess Æthelburg of Kent, Edwin&apos;s spouse, exhorting her to use her best endeavours for the conversion of her consort (Bede, H.E., II, vii, viii, x, xi). He was buried in St. Peter&apos;s Basilica on 25 October 625. [ References ] [ Pope Boniface V ] Bede. Historia ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum Gasquet, Francis Aidan. A Short History of the Catholic Church in England, 19 Gregorovius, Ferdinand. II, 113 Hunt, William. The English Church from Its Foundation to the Norman Conquest. Vol. 1. &quot; A History of the English Church &quot;, W. R. W. Stephens and William Hunt, ed. London: Macmillan and Co., 1912. 49, 56, 58 Jaffé, Regesta Pontificum Romanorum ab condita ecclesia ad annum 1198. Berlin, 1851; 2d ed., Leipsic, 1881–88. I, 222 Jungmann, Dissertationes Selectae in Historiam Ecclesiasticam, II, 389. Langen, 506 Liber Pontificalis (ed. Duchesne), I, 321–322 Mansi, Gian Domenico. X, 547–554 Mann, Horace K. Lives of the Popes I, 294–303 [ ca ] [ Adeodatus I ] [ Pope 619–625 ] [ Honorius I ] [ Boniface 5 Pope Pope Naples, Byzantine Empire 625 ??? ] Category:6th-century births Category:625 deaths Category:People from Naples Category:7th-century Italian people Category:7th-century Byzantine people Boniface 05 Boniface 05 Boniface 05 Category:Byzantine Papacy af:Pous Bonifatius V bg:Бонифаций V br:Bonifas V ca:Bonifaci V ceb:Bonifacio V cs:Bonifác V. de:Bonifatius V. et:Bonifatius V el:Πάπας Βονιφάτιος Ε΄ es:Bonifacio V eo:Bonifaco la 5-a eu:Bonifazio V.a fa:بونیفاس پنجم fr:Boniface V gl:Bonifacio V, papa ko:교황 보니파시오 5세 hr:Bonifacije V. id:Paus Bonifasius V it:Papa Bonifacio V he:בוניפקיוס החמישי jv:Paus Bonifatius V ka:ბონიფაციუს V sw:Papa Boniface V la:Bonifacius V hu:V. Bonifác pápa mk:Папа Бонифациј V mr:पोप बॉनिफेस पाचवा nl:Paus Bonifatius V ja:ボニファティウス5世 (ローマ教皇) pl:Bonifacy V pt:Papa Bonifácio V ro:Papa Bonifaciu al V-lea ru:Бонифаций V (папа римский) sk:Bonifác V. sr:Папа Бонифације V sh:Bonifacije V fi:Bonifatius V sv:Bonifatius V tl:Bonifacio V th:สมเด็จพระสันตะปาปาโบนิเฟสที่ 5 uk:Боніфацій V vec:Papa Bonifacio V vi:Giáo hoàng Bônifaciô V war:Papa Bonifacio V yo:Pope Boniface V zh:教宗波尼法爵五世