[ Hai Ba Trung the district in Hanoi named after them Hai Ba Trung, Hanoi ] [ October 2011 ] The Trưng sisters ride elephants into battle, painted by Bắc Ninh The Trưng sisters ( [ Hai Bà Trưng ]; literally: two ladies Trưng) (c. 12 - AD 43) were leaders who rebelled against Chinese rule for three years, and are regarded as national heroines of Vietnam. Their names are Trưng Trắc [ 徵 側 ] and Trưng Nhị [ 徵 貳 ]. The sisters were born in Northern Vietnam, the dates of their birth are unknown, but Trưng Trắc was older than Trưng Nhị. The exact date of their death is also unknown but both died around AD 43. [ Traditional Vietnamese account ] The third book of Đại Việt Sử ký toàn thư (大越史記全書 Complete Annals of Great Viet), [ http://www.informatik.uni-leipzig.de/~duc/sach/dvsktt/dvsktt03.html Đại Việt Sử Ký Toàn Thư - Kỷ Thuộc Hán Institute of Social Studies Vietnam 1993 October 19, 2011 Vietnamese ] published in editions between 1272 and 1697, has the following to say about the Trưng Sisters: [ 徵 Zhēng ] { reigned for three years. The queen was strong and brave. She expelled Tô Định } [ 蘇定 Sū Dìng ] { and established a kingdom as the queen, but as a female ruler could not accomplish the rebuilding of the state. Her taboo name was Trắc } [ 側 Cè ] {, and her family name was Trưng. Her family name was originally Lạc. She was the daughter of General Lạc from } { Mê Linh from } { Phong Châu, and she was the wife of Thi Sách } [ 詩索 Shī Suǒ ] { from Chu Diên County. Thi Sách was the son of General Lạc&apos;s doctor, and they arranged the marriage. (The work Cương mục tập lãm[Gangmu Jilan] erroneously indicated that his family name was Lạc.) Her capital was Mê Linh.[...] Her first year was Canh Tí [AD 40, Gengzi]. (It was the 16th year of } { Han Dynasty &apos;s Jianwuera). In the spring, the second month, the governor of Wangku Commandery, Tô Định, punished her under the law, and she also hated Định for having killed her husband. She therefore, along with her sister Nhị, rose and captured the commandery capital. Định was forced to flee. Nam Hải, Cửu Chân, Nhật Nam, and Hợp Phố all rose in response to her. She was able to take over 65 cities and declare herself queen. Thereafter, she began to use the family name of Trưng. Her second year was Tân Sửu [AD 41, Xinchou]. (It was the 17th year of Han Dynasty&apos;s Jianwuera). In the spring, the second month, there was a solar eclipse, and the moon was dark. The Han saw that as Lady Trưng had declared herself queen and captured cities, causing much distress in the border commanderies. It thus ordered Trường Sa, Hợp Phố, and our Giao Châu to prepare wagons and boats, repair the bridges and the roads, dredge the rivers, and store food supplies. It commissioned Mã Viện (Ma Yuan) as the General Fupo and Liu Long the Marquess of Fule as his assistant in order to invade. Her third year was Nhâm Dần [AD 42, Renyin]. (It was the 18th year of Han Dynasty&apos;s Jianwuera). In the spring, the first month, Mã followed the coastline and entered Sui Mountain. He went for over a thousand liand reached Lãng Bạc (west of Tây Nhai in La Thành was named Lãng Bạc) He battled with the queen, who saw that the enemy&apos;s army was large. She considered her own army to be ill-trained, and feared that it could not stand. Therefore, she withdrew to Jin (禁) River. (Jin River was referred to in history as Jin (金) River.) Her followers also thought that the queen was a woman and could not be victorious, and therefore scattered. Her kingdom therefore ended. } Lê Văn Hưu (one of the historians editing the annals) wrote: [ Trưng Trắc, Trưng Nhị are women, with a single cry led the prefectures of Cửu Chân, Nhật Nam, Hợp Phố, and 65 strongholds heed their call. They established a nation and proclaimed their rule as easily as their turning over their hands. It awakened all of us that we can be independent. Unfortunately, between the fall of the Triệu Dynasty and the rise of the Ngô Dynasty, in the span of more than one thousand years, men of this land only bowed their heads and accepted the fate of servitude to the people from the North (Chinese). The reign of Trưng Nữ Vương [Trưng Queens], started in the year of Canh Tý and ended in Nhâm Dần, for a total of 3 years (40-42). ] [ Early years ] The Trưng sisters were born in a rural Vietnamese village, into a military family. Their father was a prefect of Mê Linh [ 麊 泠 ], therefore the sisters grew up in a house well-versed in the martial arts. They also witnessed the cruel treatment of the Viets by their Chinese overlords. The Trưng sisters spent much time studying the art of warfare, as well as learning fighting skills. Procession of elephants in the Trung Sisters&apos;s Parade in Saigon, 1957 When a neighbouring prefect came to visit Mê Linh, he brought with him his son, Thi Sách. Thi Sách met and fell in love with Trưng Trắc during the visit, and they were soon married. It was said that Vietnam was formed from the union of the Dragon Lord of the Sea, King Lac Long Quan, and the immortal Chinese mountain princess, Vietnams history started to be recorded in 2879 BC, when Hung Vuong, the oldest of their one hundred sons, became king and established the Hung dynasty. For over 2000 years Hung Vuong’ successors ruled the country. Then in 111 BC, China invaded. The next 1000 years, Vietnam was a part of China’ empire. Heroic patriots resisted the Chinese but failed. In AD 939 the provincial prefect Ngo Quyen decisively defeated the Chinese. [ Rebellion ] With Chinese rule growing extremely exacting, and the policy of forcible assimilation into the Chinese mold, Thi Sách made a stand against the Chinese. The Chinese responded by executing Thi Sách as a warning to all those who contemplated rebellion. His death spurred his wife to take up his cause and the flames of insurrection spread. In AD 39, Trưng Trắc and Trưng Nhị, after successfully repelling a small Chinese unit from their village, assembled a large army consisting mostly of women. [ October 2011 ] Within months, they had taken back many (about 65) citadels from the Chinese, and had liberated Nam Việt. They became queens of the country, and managed to resist subsequent Chinese attacks on Nam Việt for over two yaars. [ Defeat ] Their revolution was short lived however, as the Chinese gathered a huge expeditionary army to crush the native fighters. Legend has it that the Chinese army did this by going into battle unclothed. The enemy&apos;s brazenness so shamed the Vietnamese female warriors that they fled the battle scene, leaving the weakened forces easily defeated by the Chinese. Phung Thi Chinh, a pregnant noble lady, was the captain of a group of soldiers who were to protect the central flank of Nam Việt. She gave birth on the front line, and with her baby in one arm, and a sword in the other, continued to fight the battle. [ October 2011 ] Despite the many heroic efforts, the Trưng sisters realised that they had been defeated and that to fight further would mean death at the hands of the Chinese. Therefore to protect their honour, and to elude ridicule, the two queens committed suicide by drowning themselves in the Hát River in AD 43. Some of their loyal soldiers continued to fight to the death, whilst others committed suicide (including Phung Thi Chinh, who also took her newborn baby&apos;s life). There is a story of one woman who would randomly charge through Chinese camps, screaming and slaying random men. Finally, after killing many more, she committed suicide in the hope of returning to her respected commanders. [ October 2011 ] [ Traditional Chinese account ] The Chinese traditional historical accounts on the Trưng sisters are remarkably brief. They are found in two different chapters of Hou Han Shu, the history for the Eastern Han Dynasty, against which the Trưng sisters had carried out their uprising. Chapter eighty six of Hou Han Shu, entitled Biographies of the Southern and the Southwestern Barbarians, { The use of the word barbarians is historical, and is translated as used in the original Chinese texts. } has this short description: In the 16th year of Jianwu [ 40], Jiaozhi (Giao Chỉ) [modern northern Vietnam and extreme western Guangdong and western Guangxi ] women Zhēng Cè (Trưng Trắc) and Zhēng Èr (Trưng Nhị) rebelled and attacked the commandery capital. Zhēng Cè was the daughter of the sheriff of Miling (Mê Linh; 麊泠) County, and she married a man named Shi Suo (Thi Sách; 詩索) from....(Chu Diên) Shi&apos;s home is rendered 朱? (Zhu ?), where ? is a character that is not in Unicode and therefore unavailable online. She was a ferocious warrior. Su Ding (蘇定), the governor of Jiaozhi Commandery, curbed her with laws. Cè became angry and rebelled. The barbarian towns of Jiuzhen, Rinan, and Hepu Commanderies all joined her, and she captured sixty five cities and claimed to be queen. The governors of Jiaozhi Province and the commanderies could only defend themselves. Emperor Guangwu therefore ordered the Changsha, Hepu, and Jiaozhi Commanderies to prepare wagons and boats, to repair the roads and bridges, to open the mountain passes, and to save food supplies. In the 18th year 42, he sent Ma Yuan the General Fupuo and Duan Zhi (段志) the General Lochuan to lead ten odd thousands of men from Changsha, Guiyang, Linling, and Cangwu Commanderies against them. In the summer of the next year 43, Ma recaptured Jiaozhi and killed Zhēng Cè, Zhēng Èr, and others in battle, and the rest scattered. He also attacked Du Yang (都陽), a rebel of the Jiuzhen Commandery, and Du surrendered and was moved, along with some 300 of his followers to Lingling Commandery. The border regions were thus pacified. Chapter twenty four, the biographies of Ma and some of his notable male descendants, had a parallel description that also added that Ma was able to impress the locals by creating irrigation networks to help the people and also by simplifying and clarifying the Han laws, and was able to get the people to follow Han&apos;s laws. The traditional Chinese account therefore does not indicate abuse of the Vietnamese population by the Chinese officials. It implicitly disavows the traditional Vietnamese accounts of massive cruelty and of the Chinese official killing Trưng Trắc&apos;s husband. There is no indication in the Chinese account that the Trưng sisters committed suicide, or that other followers followed example and did so, or that the Chinese army fought naked to win the battle. Indeed, Ma, known in Chinese history for his strict military discipline, is not believed by the Chinese to have carried out cruel or unusual tactics. That account is in contrast to the Vietnamese. [ Impact ] { Ho Chi Minh City. } The Trưng Sisters are highly revered in Vietnam, as they led the first resistance movement against the occupying Chinese after 247 years of domination. Many temples are dedicated to them, and a yearly holiday, occurring in February, to commemorate their deaths is observed by many Vietnamese. A district in Hanoi called the Hai Ba Trung district is named after them. In addition, numerous large streets in major cities [ Vietnam Country Map Periplus Travel Maps 2002 –03 0-7946-0070-0 ] and many schools are named after them. The stories of the Trưng sisters and of another famous woman warrior, Triệu Thị Trinh, are cited by some historians as hints that Vietnamese society before Sinicization was a matriarchal one, where there are no obstacles for women in assuming leadership roles. Even though the Trung Sisters&apos; revolt against the Chinese was almost 2,000 years ago, its legacy in Vietnam remains. The two sisters are considered to be a national symbol in Vietnam. They represent Vietnam&apos;s independence. Often, they are depicted as two women, riding two giant war elephants. Many a times, they are seen leading their followers into battle against the Chinese. The Trung sisters were more than two sisters that gave their life up for their country, they are powerful symbols of Vietnamese resistance and freedom. [ References ] [ 30em ] [ Notes ] [ &quot; Note &quot; 2 ] [ External links ] Trung sisters Tuyet A. Tran &amp; Chu V. Nguyen [ Trưng Sisters ] [ Rulers of Vietnam 40-43 First Chinese domination (History of Vietnam) Second Chinese domination (History of Vietnam) ] Category:12 births Category:43 deaths Category:Vietnamese dynasties Category:Vietnamese rebels Category:Rebellions in Vietnam Category:Women in ancient Chinese warfare Category:Queens regnant Category:1st-century female rulers Category:Women in 1st-century warfare Category:Wars involving Han Dynasty zh-min-nan:Trưng Chí-moāi fr:Sœurs Trung ko:쯩 자매 he:האחיות גונג ja:徴姉妹 ru:Сёстры Чынг sh:Sestre Trung sv:Trungsystrarna vi:Hai Bà Trưng zh:徵氏姐妹