[ 33 S 130 E scale:5000000 title ] Map of Australia, showing the Great Australian Bight. { Nullarbor. Credit Jacques Descloitres, Visible Earth, } { NASA. } The Great Australian Bight is a large bight, or open bay, off the central and western portions of the southern coastline of mainland Australia. [ Extent ] The International Hydrographic Organization defines the Great Australian Bight as part of the southeastern Indian Ocean, with the following limits: [ http://www.iho-ohi.net/iho_pubs/standard/S-23/S23_1953.pdf Limits of Oceans and Seas, 3rd edition 1953 International Hydrographic Organization 7 February 2010 ] On the North. The South coast of Australia. &lt; p &gt; On the South.A line joining West Cape Howe ( [ 35 08 S 117 37 E inline ] ) Australia to South West Cape, Tasmania. &lt; p &gt; On the East. A line from Cape Otway, Australia, to King Island and thence to Cape Grim, the Northwest extreme of Tasmania. Another definition is that the Bight&apos;s boundaries are from Cape Pasley, Western Australia, to Cape Carnot, South Australia - a distance of 1,160  km or 720 miles. [ http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/242885/Great-Australian-Bight Great Australian Bight Encyclopaedia Britannica 29 September 2011 ] The much more generally accepted name in Australia for the adjoining waterbody is the Southern Ocean rather than the Indian Ocean. Much of the Bight lies due south of the expansive Nullarbor Plain, which straddles the two Australian states of South Australia and Western Australia. The Eyre Highway passes close to the cliffs of the Bight between the Head of the Bight and Eucla. [ Exploration ] The Great Australian Bight was first encountered by European explorers in 1627, when a Dutch navigator, François Thijssen, sailed along its western margins. The coast was later first accurately charted by the English explorer Captain Matthew Flinders in 1802, during his circumnavigation of the Australian continent. A later land-based survey was accomplished by Edward John Eyre. [ Natural history ] Great Australian Bight The coast line of the Great Australian Bight is characterised by cliff faces (up to 60 m high), surfing beaches and rock platforms, ideal for whale-watching. The waters of the Great Australian Bight, despite being relatively shallow, are not fertile. While most continental shelves are rich in sea life and make popular fishing areas, the barren desert s north of the bight have very little rainfall, and what there is mostly flows inland, to dissipate underground or in salt lake s. In consequence, the Great Australian Bight receives very little of the runoff that fertilises most continental shelves and is essentially a marine desert. It is probably best noted for the large number of shark s that frequent its coastal waters, as well as the increasing numbers of Southern Right Whales that migrate within the region. One location on the bight that is specifically oriented towards the understanding of the natural history on its coastline is the Eyre Bird Observatory. [ Current conditions ] Economically, the Bight has been exploited over many years as part of the fishing, whaling and shellfish industries. Bluefin tuna have been a favoured target of fishing in the Bight. The settlements existing along the coastline of the Bight, such as Ceduna and Eucla have facilities to access the bight. Some other locations on the Eyre Highway or located on the Nullarbor do not have facilities or easy access. [ See also ] Great South Australian Coastal Upwelling System Nullarbor Plain Southern Ocean Western Australia - South Australia Border [ References ] [ Further reading ] Edminds, Jack (1976) Panorama of Western Australia : the Great Australian Bight Perth,W.A. Periodicals Division, West Australian Newspapers. ISBN 0-909699-11-9 (ANB/PRECIS SIN 0140147) [ External links ] Great Australian Bight Marine Park - located in Commonwealth waters Great Australian Bight Marine Park - Eyre Peninsula - the South Australian portion of the park Great Australian Bight Trawl Fishery Wild Down Under Great Australian Bight - BBC Nature Documentary webpage for the fauna of the region aerial video of the Great Australian Bight Category:Bays of Australia Category:Landforms of the Southern Ocean Category:Coastline of Western Australia Category:Coastline of South Australia ar:الخليج الأسترالي العظيم be:Вялікі Аўстралійскі заліў be-x-old:Вялікі Аўстралійскі заліў bg:Голям Австралийски залив cs:Velký australský záliv da:Australske bugt de:Große Australische Bucht et:Suur Austraalia laht es:Gran Bahía Australiana fa:خلیج بزرگ استرالیا fr:Grande baie australienne fy:Grutte Australyske Bocht ko:그레이트오스트레일리아 만 it:Great Australian Bight ka:ავსტრალიის დიდი ყურე kk:Үлкен Австралия Шығанағы lv:Lielais Austrālijas līcis lt:Didžioji Australijos įlanka mk:Голем Австралиски Залив nl:Grote Australische Bocht ja:グレートオーストラリア湾 no:Australbukta pl:Wielka Zatoka Australijska pt:Grande Baía Australiana ru:Большой Австралийский залив sr:Велики аустралијски залив fi:Iso Australianlahti sv:Stora Australbukten ta:பெரும் ஆஸ்திரேலிய விரிகுடா tr:Büyük Avustralya Körfezi uk:Велика Австралійська затока war:Dako nga Bahia han Australya zh:大澳洲灣