[ Blue-cheeked Bee-eater Merops persicus.jpg 250px LC IUCN3.1 Animal ia Chordata Aves Coraciiformes Meropidae Merops M. persicus Merops persicus Pallas, 1773 ] The Blue-cheeked Bee-eater, Merops persicus, is a near passerine bird in the bee-eater family, Meropidae. It breeds in Northern Africa, and the Middle East from eastern Turkey to Kazakhstan and India. It is generally strongly migratory, wintering in tropical Africa, although some populations breed and live year round in the Sahel. [ Hilary Fry Josep del Hoyo Andrew Elliott Sargatal Jordi Family Meropidae (Bee-eaters) Handbook of the Birds of the World. Volume 6, Mousebirds to Hornbills 2001 337 Barcelona Lynx Edicions 978-84-87334-30-6 ] This species occurs as a rare vagrant north of its breeding range. [ Description ] This species, like other bee-eaters, is a richly-coloured, slender bird. It is predominantly green; its face has blue sides with a black eye stripe, and a yellow and brown throat; the beak is black. It can reach a length of [ 31 cm in on ], with the two elongated central tail feathers adding another [ 7 cm in on ]. Sexes are mostly alike but the tail-streamers of the female are shorter. This is a bird which breeds in sub-tropical semi-desert with a few trees, such as acacia. It winters in open woodland or grassland. As the name suggests, bee-eaters predominantly eat insect s, especially bee s, wasp s and hornet s, which are caught in the air by sorties from an open perch. However, this species probably takes more dragonflies than any other food item. Its preferred hunting perch is telephone wires if available. Blue-cheeked Bee-eaters may nest solitarily or in loose colonies of up to ten birds. They may also nest in colonies with European Bee-eater s. The nests are located in sandy in sandy banks, embankments, low cliffs or on the shore of the Caspian Sea. They make a relatively long tunnel of [ 1 to(-) 3 m ft on ] in length in which the four to eight (usually six or seven), spherical white eggs are laid. Both the male and the female take care of the eggs, although the female alone incubates them at night. Incubation takes 23–26 days. The call sounds &apos;flatter&apos; and less &apos;fluty&apos; than the European Bee-eater. Thumamah, KSA 1992 [ Subspecies ] It has two subspecies Merops persicus persicus - Breeds in Asia, winters in East and Southern Africa Merops persicus chrysocercus - Breeds in North Africa, winters in West Africa. This species is closely related to Blue-tailed Bee-eater, M. philippinus of East Asia, and the Olive Bee-eater of Africa, and has been treated as being the same species (conspecific). [ References ] [ BirdLife International 2004 47770 Merops persicus 11 May 2006 ] Database entry includes justification for why this species is of least concern [ Merops persicus ] [ Merops persicus ] Category:Meropidae Category:Birds of Turkey Category:Birds of Iran Category:Birds of Kazakhstan Category:Birds of Asia Category:Birds of Pakistan Category:Birds of Morocco Category:Birds of Africa Category:Birds of South Africa kbd:Къумщу af:Blouwangbyvreter az:Yaşıl qızlarquş br:Gwespetaer-Persia ca:Abellerol gola-roig de:Blauwangenspint es:Merops persicus eu:Merops persicus fa:زنبورخوار گلوخرمایی fr:Guêpier de Perse hu:Perzsa gyurgyalag nl:Blauwwangbijeneter no:Blåkinnbieter pt:Abelharuco-pérsico ru:Зелёная щурка fi:Vihermehiläissyöjä sv:Grön biätare tr:Mavi yanaklı arı kuşu