[ April 2007 ] Bangladesh has a rich musical heritage. From ancient times, music served the purpose of documenting the lives of the people and was widely patronized by the rulers. Bengali music during this period was mostly linked to spirituality and prayer. Most folk songs relate to some form of praise for the gods and their creation. Songs were associated with particular groups of people, such as fishermen, cart-drivers, hermits and so on. Modernisation of Bengali music occurred at different times and, for the most part, independent of western influence. Most notable of these changes were: Popularity of folk music of Sufi genres: introduction of philosophy and religion in music. Introduction of variations of classical music through the works of Rabindranath Tagore, a Nobel Laureate poet. Introduction of complicated musical composition and use of music as a revolutionary tool through the works of Kazi Nazrul Islam. Modernisation of folk music. Fusion of traditional music with Western instrumentation to revitalise and re-popularise Bengali music in a society increasingly overwhelmed by the West. [ Categories ] The music of Bangladesh can be broadly categorized among the following genres: The three main categories are Classical, folk and Western-influenced pop. [ Bangladesh Cultures of the World Mariam Whyte, Yong Jui Lin Marshall Cavendish 2009 0-7614-4475-0, 9780761444756 144 104 http://books.google.co.uk/books?id%3DRFywfJunO1wC%26amp%3Bpg%3DPA104%26amp%3Bdq%3Dmusic%2Bbangladesh#v%3Donepage%26amp%3Bq%3Dmusic%20bangladesh%26amp%3Bf%3Dfalse ] [ Classical ] Bangladeshi classical music is based on modes called raga s (rag, in Bengali). All traditional Bengali music tend to be based on various variations of Hindustani Classical Music. Some of the most talented classical musicians of the sub-continent come from Bangladesh including Ustad Allauddin Khan, Sangeetacharya Tarapada Chakraborty, Pandit Ravi Shankar, Pandit Manas Chakraborty, Ustad Ayet Ali Khan, Ustad Abed Hossain Khan and so on. [ Rabindra sangeet ] [ Rabindra Sangeet ] { Rabindranath Tagore } Rabindra sangeet, based on the work of the Bengali poet Rabindranath Tagore is one of the best-known genres of Bengali music outside Bangladesh. [ Nazrul Geeti ] { Kazi Nazrul Islam } { Nazrul } Geeti literally meaning &quot; Nazrul&apos;s songs &quot;, are the works of Kazi Nazrul Islam,the national poet of Bangladesh and an active revolutionary during the Indian independence movement. Due to Islam&apos;s dedicated nature and lifestyle, Nazrul geeti, which consists of about 40 songs composed by the poet, was not mainstream for a very long time (and is arguably still not as commercially recognized as Rabindra sangeet). Bangladeshi singer Firoza Begum played a very big role in popularising Nazrul geeti in both Bangladesh and West Bengal. Sohorab Hossain, Ferdous Ara, Shabnam Mushtari, also played a crucial role in popularizing Nazrul geeti. [ Folk ] Bengali folk music has a long history. Several people contributed to what has become one of the most important musical influences in the lives of Bengalis on both sides of the (West Bengal-Bangladesh) border. Among these are Lalon Fokir, Hason Raja and Ramesh Shill. Abbas Uddin was a key player in popularising folk music later on. { Hason Raja. } Folk music can clearly be distinguished and classified into several sub-genres: Baul : mainly inspired by Lalon Fokir and his Sufi&apos;isque way of life and almost exclusively performed by hermits who have embraced such a life style Bhandari : devotional music from the South (mainly Chittagong) Bhatiali : music of fishermen and boatman, almost always tied by a common raga (mode), sung solo Bhawaiya : song of bullock-cart drivers of the North (Rangpur) Gajir geet : traditional music from the North (Rangpur) Gombhira : song (originating in Chapai Nawabganj, in the North) performed with a particular distinctive rhythm and dance with two performers, always personifying a man and his grand father, discussing a topic to raise social awareness Hason Raja : devotional songs written by music composer Hason Raja (from Sylhet near Assam) that was recently repopularised as dance music Jaari : songs involving musical battle between two groups Jatra Pala: songs associated exclusively with plays (performed on-stage). Usually involves colourful presentations of historical themes. Kirtan : devotional song depicting love of Hindu god Krishno and his (best-known) wife, Radha Pala : songs from the haor (lake) area in Sylhet, Kishoregonj, and Netrokona usually performed on stage live by folk singers Kavigan : poems sung with simple music usually presented on stage as a musical battle between poets Lalon : best known of all folk songs and the most import sub-genre of Baul songs, almost entirely attributed to spiritual writer and composer, Lalon Fokir of Kushtia (Western Bangladesh, near the border with West Bengal) Mursiya : Islamic songs of devotion of the Shi&apos;ah groups based mainly on Western influences Shaari : song of boatmen sung in groups to match the beat of the oar movement Upojatiyo : songs of the minor ethnic groups - worth noting, this is not really a classification since songs of these ethnic groups (of which there are at least 13 different groups) vary widely and have very distinct and intriguing characteristics Letto &apos;s song: songs from Mymensingh (North of Dhaka) that also allegedly influenced Nazrul geeti Wedding songs: sung all over Bangladesh but always tied by similar tunes and by, obviously, a common theme, marriage Of these several groups, Baul songs are the best known. The baul repertoire was particularly enriched by the works of Lalon. All folk songs are characterised by simple musical structure and words. Before the advent of radio, entertainment in the rural areas relied to a large extent on stage performances by folk singers. After the arrival of new communication and digital media, many folk songs were modernised and incorporated into modern songs (Adhunik songeet). [ Baul ] [ Baul ] Baul has been such a huge influence in Bangladeshi music that it deserves being called a genre on its own. However, although Baul geeti can be characterised by particular nature of music and presentation, in general, the genre is actually also defined by a definite cult. In order to understand Baul geeti, it is necessary to understand its creators. Baul is almost exclusively performed by Baul s (hermits) who are followers of Sufism in Bangladesh. (Note that traditionally bauls were Hindus; the influence of Sufism maybe attributed to Lalon Shah. Early Bauls claimed to be followers of Islam and focused on love of the society and harmony with nature. Subjected to harsh teasing and isolation by the society Baul geeti went through a major period of struggle, as did the Bauls themselves. However, with time, Islamists were forced by the general population to accept the Bauls and their spiritual music as part of the society. Present day Bauls in Bangladesh are Sufis. Most live simple lives and earn mainly from performing their music. Baul songs always incorporate simple words expressing songs with deeper meanings involving creation, society, lifestyle and human emotions. The songs are performed with very little musical support to the main carrier, the vocal. Bauls, bohemian by nature and belief, leave on grand expeditions, writing and performing music on their entire trip to earn a living and disseminating their notions of love and spirituality. Ektara (literally, the one-string), Dotara (literally, the two-strings), ba(n)shi (country flute made from bamboo)) and cymbals are used in the presentation of Baul geeti. Although, in recent days, Baul geeti has lost popularity mainly due to disruption of the lifestyle of the bauls by urbanisation and westernisation, the songs have permanently altered Bengali music, especially in the form of Lalon geeti. Baul songs were hugely promoted by Fakir Alamgir and Feroz Shahi in Bangladesh. [ Lalon ] { Lalon geeti is the work of composer and philosopher, } { Lalon Shah (also known as Lalon Fokir). Most of his songs are extensions of Baul geeti. However, his songs are always more philosophical in nature, involving greater thought about abstract themes. } Lalon geeti originated in Kushtia and has been popularised throughout the two Bengals (West Bengal and Bangladesh) by various artists. Among the proponents of Lalon geeti, Farida Parveen is particularly worth mentioning for her extensive work in modernising tunes. [ Adhunik ] Adhunik sangeet literally means &quot; modern songs &quot;. Although, to outsiders, this may seem like an ambiguous nomenclature, it has particular motivations. Bengali music traditionally has been classified mainly by the region of origin and the creators of the musical genre, such as Nazrul geeti (written and composed by Kazi Nazrul Islam), ghombhira (unique to a specific area in Bangladesh), etc. However, this prevented the ability to classify any music that failed to fit into any of the classes. In the period just before Indian independence (Bengal, under British rule, was a part of one massive India that does not exactly correspond to the India of current day), several new minor musical genres emerged, mainly in the form of playback songs for movies. These songs failed to fit into any particular genre, but seemed to be tied together by common theme of &quot; music for the masses &quot;. Most such music aimed at the mainstream audience and were characterized by popular catchy tunes with simple words that were far moved from the classical ragas (modes). Hence, a miscellaneous category, Adhunik sangeet, was created, since, at that time, this music was &quot; modern &quot;. Although over time these so-called &quot; modern &quot; songs have become fairly old, they continue to be called by the same name. Interestingly, this category has grown faster and wider than any other, since it&apos;s miscellaneous nature accommodated any form of music that failed to fit elsewhere. The common theme continues to exist. Thus, despite the vague nomenclature, the genre remains well-defined. [ Notable Adhunik sangeet singers ] Runa Laila Shahnaz Rahmatullah Sabina Yasmin Ferdousi Rahman Syed Abdul Hadi Mitali Mukherjee Shakila Zafar Samina Chowdhury Alam Ara Minu Abdul Jabbar Bashir Ahmad Andrew Kishore Baby Nazneen Kanak Chapa Momtaz Begum Fahmida Nabi Ustad Neaz Mohammed Chowhhury Subir Nandi Abida Sultana Rafiq ul Alam Asif Akbar Rezwana Chowdhury Papia Sorwar Dilruba Khan [ Modern music and western influence ] Post-independence, Adhunik sangeet continued to attract large numbers of music enthusiasts. However, with time, newer generations demanded more upbeat music. In the 80&apos;s, politically charged themes started to gain popularity once again. [ Pop music ] { Ayub Bachchu of } { L.R.B performing at a concert. } Pop music in Bangladesh was initiated by the so-called band music. As the name suggests, this form of music was heavily influenced by the West. The greatest contributors to pop or pop-rock music also included the following singers: Azam Khan Fakir Alamgir Artists of the &quot; Adhunik Gaan &quot; and folk (especially new wave) genre also contributed to the pop music from time to time. The popularity of the band music increased enormously with the growing fan following of bands that fused traditional Bengali music with Western pop-rock influences. Souls L.R.B Nagarbaul Ark Arbovirus Artcell Aurthohin Bengali Bangladesh Beduin Black Bortoman Cryptic Fate Dalchhut Dark Dour Dreek Eclipse Embrace Of Death Face to Face Feedback Hash (#) Lalon Maqsood O&apos; dHAKA Mechanix Metal Maze Nagorik Nemesis Obscure Orbz Pentagon Powersurge Prohor Prometheus Radioactive Renaissance Shironamhin Stentorian The Trap The Watson Brothers Warfaze Orchid Abong Kandari Akhra [ Rock music ] Bangladeshi rock was introduced as a genre by Azam Khan, RockStarta, Warfaze Miles and LRB. Hassan (associated with Ark [ July 2011 ] ) and James ( Faruk Mahfuz Anam ) (associated with Feelings and, later, Nogor Baul ) contributed in further popularizing Bangla rock music. Bangla hard-rock was introduced by bands such as Ark Rockstrata, Warfaze and later Orbz, among many others in the late 90s. Bengali rock songs became particularly popular following Ark&apos;s (Tajmohol),(Janmabhumi),(Shadhinota), James (Thik ache bondhu) etc. albums. The first female rock singer of Bangladesh was the popular young teenage singer Tishma. Bangladeshi rock scene has evolved into two distinct categories. Mainstream Underground [ Instruments ] Common instruments are: Sitar Violin Flute s Esraj (a traditional Bengali instrument) [ Singers ] [ Adhunik ] Abeda Sultana : contemporary Abdul Jabbar : playback singer for movies in 1960s and 1970s &amp; artist of the Shadhin Bangla Betar Kendro Andrew Kishor : playback singer for movies for three decades Fatema-tuz-zohura : respected singer for three decades Zinga Goshty - one of the earliest bands (1970s) in Dhaka (which originated from Chittagong ) Rebecca Sultana : contemporary Runa Laila : Ghazal singer and playback singer in 1980s Sabina Yasmin : playback singer for four decades Ferdous Ara : Famous Singer of &quot; Adhunik &quot; songs Asif Iqbal Sunbeam : Revolutionary remix artist for the album chumki (first Bengali digital remix album), also have solo career from 1990s Tapan Chowdhury : went solo after beginning career in Souls. Uma Islam : playback singer in 1970s and 1980s &amp; artist of the Shadhin Bangla Betar Kendro M. Thakur From the band Zeathers (1989), solo singer, living in New York Shakila Zafar Asif Akbar recording artist/playback singer [ Classical ] Begum Akhtar : (deceased) Sangeetacharya Tarapada Chakraborty : (deceased) [ Nazrul Geeti (Kazi Nazrul Islam- National Poet of Bangladesh) ] Angur Bala : deceased Arjumand Banu : deceased Dalia Nausheen Suzana ansar Firoza Begum : popular in the 1960s, carried out lot of experimental composition work in an attempt to popularise Nazrul geeti Ferdous Ara : (Leading Singer, Teacher and Researcher of Nazrul Sangeet, Teaching Nazrul Sangeet at DU, Govt. Music College, Nazrul Institute. Running an Institution of Music named &quot; SURSHAPTAK &quot; ) Leena Taposhi Khan (Singer &amp; Nazrrul Reaserser, playing leading role to popularising Nazrul Song ) Khairul Anam : contemporary Khaled Hossain Shamsi Faruque Shimki Laila Arjumand Banu : deceased Sadya Afreen Mallick Shabnam Mushtari Shaheen mahmud Samad Sohorab Hossain : played key-role in popularising Nazrul geeti Nilufer Yasmin : deceased Sudhin Das Neelima Das Sumon Chowdhury [ Folk ] Abbas Uddin : revolutionary work with folk music and its revitalisation Abdul Alim Shah Abdul Karim : from Sylhet Abdur Rahman Bayati : from Jessore Binoy Bansi Das : rhythm-specialist from Chittagong Bijoy Sarker : from Jessore, deceased Farida Parveen : unrivalled in Lalon Geeti, known for three decades, carried out huge projects on modernising and popularising Lalon geeti Ferdausi Rahman : immensely popular for three decades, heir to rich tradition established by her father, Abbasuddin, Horolal Rai : deceased Kanai Lal Shil : dotara player, deceased Kangalini Sufia : singer from Chittagong Khoda Box Shai : from Kustia Kutubul Alam : gombhira singer from Rajshahi Neena Hamid : contemporary Saydur Rahman Bayati : from Manikganj Rothindranath Rai Rowshan Bayati : from Jessore Beauty Das from Chittagong [ Pop/Rock Vocalists And some Bands ] James (Faruk Mahfuz Anam) Vocalist of Nogor Baul In Dhaka : rock band Hassan : Pop rock musician. Azam Khan : A pioneering musician ever lived in Bangladeshi Pop culture, often referred to as the &quot; Pop Guru &quot; of Bangladesh. Isha Khan Duray : Singer and producer. Habib Wahid : Singer-songwriter and record producer. Tishma : singer-songwriter and first female music producer of Bangladesh, she also changed and revolutionised the entire performance and style for female singers in Bangladesh, teenage heart throb of pop music. Introduced new rock and pop styles in Bangladesh too. Arnob : Singer-songwriter and record producer. Upol Islam : Singer-songwriter and record producer. Happy Akhand : survived by his brother Lucky Akhand, after his untimely death in 80s. Jewel : deceased Lucky Akhand : legendary pop singer who carried on the work of brother Happy Akhand Souls : emerged in late 70s in Chittagong, gained popularity over more than a decade, served to launch Ayub Bacchu (vocalist of L.R.B) and Tapan Chowdhuri, been less visible in the 90s Tapan Chowdhury : went solo after beginning career in Souls Warfaze : emerged in mid-eighties as hard-rock band and initiated rock era of Bangladesh Beauty Das from Chittagong (Winner 2002 Benson and Hedges Best Vocal) ORBZ (Metal/Hard Rock/ Progressive Rock) (GuItAR - Imran/Vox - Saza/DrumS - Rakib/GuItAR - Sifat/BaSS - Nishat) ORGAN (Progressive Rock Band) (Guitar - Babu, Vox - Anik, Drums - Emran, Keyboard - Faysal, Bass - Shuvo) just released an album (Protibimbo - A BAND MIXED ALBUM) on 26 March 2011. Nemesis : Hugely popular alt-rock band, currently recording their 2nd album. Powersurge : One of the newcoming successful Heavy metal bands. Abeer : Instrumentalist, Singer and Songwriter. [ Rabindra sangeet ] Abid : the youngest artist in tagore song Atiqul Islam : deceased Fahmeeda Khatun Iffat Ara Dewan : contemporary Kalim Sharafi Milia Ali : contemporary Mita Huque Papia Sarwar : contemporary Rezwana Chowdhury Banya Sadi Mohammad Takiullah Chanchal Khan: contemporary/living abroad (www.chanchalkhan.com) Iqbal Ahmed : living abroad Sirajus Salekin : contemporary/living abroad (Sydney, Australia) Shama Rahman: Cut 9 audio albums for UNESCO, Paris for the 150th Birth Anniversary of Tagore (www.rahmanshama.com) Lily Islam : contemporary Sanjeeda Khatun : contemporary, better known as a specialist in Rabindra sangeet and as the founder of Dhaka&apos;s popular music school, Chhayanot Zahidur Rahim : deceased Kaderi Kibria : living abroad (USA) Laisa Ahmed Lisa :one of the leading artist of tagore song, also a popular teacher of Microbiology &amp; Biotechnology at Jagannath University, Dhaka [ Hip Hop ] Stoic Bliss Desi Desciples Deshi MCs Uptown Lokolz Lal Miah T.O.R. - Theology of Rap D-Briggaz LIQUIDSILVA Rap HooD Gangstaz T.O.D - Thugz Of Dhaka [ Instrumental/compositional ] In 2009, Mushfiqul Alam initiated instrumental/compositional genre in Bangladesh with his successful debut album Tunes Of Heaven. { http://www.music.cotheeka.com/tunesofheaven.htm } This album became popular among listeners of Bangladesh who were very fond of compositions of Beethoven, Yanni and Kenny G. [ References ] [ External links ] Bengali Mp3 Site Bengali Songs and Videos download Desi Movement Bangla Radio-Protitee.com Bangla Music - BanglaMusic.com Bangla Ganer Bhubon www.music.com.bd we will make you live Category:Bangladeshi music Category:Bengali music fr:Musique bangladaise