[ February 2012 ] [ yes 1856 3 21 ] [ yes 1940 5 3 1856 3 21 ] { Thomasville, Georgia } { Place of burial } { Henry O. Flipper.jpg } { Cadet Henry O. Flipper in his West Point cadet uniform. It has three large round brass buttons left, middle and right showing five rows. The buttons are interconnected left to right and vice-versa by decorative thread. He is wearing a starched white collar and no tie. He is a lighter colored African-American with plated corn rows of neatly done hair. He is facing the camera and looking to the left of the viewer. } { Cadet Henry O. Flipper USMA Class of 1877 } [ United States of America ] { United States Army } { 1877–1882 } { Second Lieutenant } { Civil Engineer } Henry Ossian Flipper (21 March 1856  – 3 May 1940) was an American soldier, former slave, and the first African American to graduate from the United States Military Academy at West Point in 1877, earning a commission as a 2nd Lieutenant in the US Army. Following Flipper&apos;s commission, he was transferred to one of the all-black regiments serving in the US Army which were historically led by white officers. Assigned to A Troop under the command of Captain Nicholas M. Nolan, he became the first non-white officer to lead Buffalo Soldiers of the 10th Cavalry. Flipper served with competency and distinction during the Apache Wars and the Victorio Campaign but was haunted by rumors alleging improprieties. At one point he was court martial ed and dismissed from the US Army. After losing his commission in the Army, Flipper worked throughout Mexico and Latino America and as an assistant to the Secretary of the Interior. He retired to Atlanta in 1931 and died of natural causes in 1940. In 1976 his descendants applied to the US military for a review of Flipper&apos;s court martial and dismissal. A review found that the conviction and punishment were &quot; unduly harsh and unjust &quot; and recommended that Flipper’s dismissal be changed to a good conduct discharge. Shortly afterwards, an application for pardon was filed with the Secretary of the Army which was forwarded to the Department of Justice. President Bill Clinton pardoned Lieutenant Henry O. Flipper on 19 February 1999. [ Biography ] Flipper was born into slavery in Thomasville, Georgia the eldest of five brothers. His mother, Isabelle Flipper, and his father, Festus Flipper, a shoemaker and carriage -trimmer, were owned by Ephraim G. Ponder, a wealthy slave dealer. { The Multiracial Activist – www.multiracial.com – The Colored Cadet at West Point. Autobiography of Lieut. Henry Ossian Flipper at multiracial.com } Flipper attended Atlanta University during Reconstruction. There, as a freshman, Representative James C. Freeman appointed him to attend West Point, where there were already four other black cadets. The small group had a difficult time at the academy, where they were rejected by white students. Nevertheless, Flipper persevered and in 1877 became the first of the group to graduate,earning a commission as a Second Lieutenant in the U.S. Army cavalry. He was assigned to the 10th Cavalry Regiment, { Lieutenant Henry Ossian Flipper, U.S. Army 1856–1940. US Army. Retrieved 22 November 2007 } one of the four all-black Buffalo Soldier regiments in the army, and became the first black officer to command regular troops in the U.S. Army. (Previously all-black regiments were led by white officers). [ 10th Cavalry Regiment ] 10th Regiment United States Cavalry insignia In July 1877 Second Lieutenant Flipper reported to Fort Sill in the Indian Territory, for assignment with the 10th Cavalry. But the 10th was not at Fort Sill, they were at Fort Concho. He was not assigned to a cavalry troop but given work assignments including engineering a ditch to drain a swamp that was malaria -infested. He supervised the construction of roads and telegraph lines. Finally Flipper received orders to report to Fort Concho in west Texas in October 1877. He was assigned to A Troop. He was the first non-white officer to lead Buffalo Soldiers of the 10th Cavalry. [ Mobeetie Jail Museum Lieutenant Henry O. Flipper http://www.mobeetie.com/pages/flipper.htm 5 September 2009 Old Mobeetie Texas Association 2009 ] Captain Nicholas M. Nolan, the commander of A troop, 10th Cavalry, was the officer assigned to teach him what was needed to know about being a cavalry officer. Nolan was censured by several white officers for allowing Flipper into his quarters for dinner, where his daughter Kate was present. Nolan defended his action by stating that Flipper was an &quot; officer and a gentleman &quot; just like any other officer present. [ Bigelow John Jr, Lieutenant, U.S.A., R.Q.M. Tenth Cavalry &quot; The Tenth Regiment of Cavalry &quot; from &quot; The Army of the United States Historical Sketches of Staff and Line with Portraits of Generals-in-Chief &quot; United States Army 12 August 2009 no date given but about 1890 http://www.history.army.mil/books/R%26amp%3BH/R%26amp%3BH-10CV.htm ] In August 1878 Nolan married his second wife, Anne Eleanor Dwyer in San Antonio, Texas. They had one child, a girl. Miss Mollie Dwyer, Anne&apos;s sister, arrived shortly after Troop A moved to Fort Elliott in Texas in early 1879. Mollie Dwyer and Flipper became friends and often went riding together. Nolan was the de facto commander of Fort Elliott and he made Flipper his adjutant. Flipper had high marks from his commander. However, there were murmurs and letters hinting at improprieties against Lt. Flipper, an African-American and Mollie Dwyer, a caucasian. It would be the beginning of a smear campaign. During the next many months he sent and received letters from his friend Mollie. In the Fall of 1879 a Federal Marshal named Norton armed with blank warrants began a quarrel with a County Judge. Other county officials stepped in to defend the judge and Norton arrested all of them with his armed men. Norton took the county men to Fort Elliott to be placed in the guard house. Nolan was required by law to accept the prisoners and it appears that Nolan talked with the Wheeler County Judge. The telegraph lines then were suddenly cut and Nolan decided to act. Flipper gathered the prisoners in the middle of the night and with two soldiers set off for another Fort in Indian Territory. Marshal Norton captured the entire party and arrested Flipper and one of his soldiers. The other soldier ran back to the Fort to report what had happened. Norton then set off for Dallas, Texas. Nolan mounted a detail of men and took off in pursuit. He caught up to the party and made it clearly known that no prisoners would be shot while trying to escape, because the Federal Marshal and his prisoners were now under military escort. A Federal Judge dismissed the warrants and Norton filed federal charges of &quot; interfering with the process of the law &quot; against the two officers. The two officers were quickly tried and found guilty. Both were fined a thousand dollars which was an enormous fine for its time. Norton was satisfied then left. The Federal Judge then suspended payment and dismissed the two military officers. Army relations in the county of Wheeler improved tremendously. Nolan had Flipper under his wing for the first part of the Apache Wars in early 1879 until he was reassigned to G Troop. Until November 1879, during his Captain&apos;s four month leave, Flipper commanded this unit by himself and received a well done. In May 1880, Flipper and Nolan reunited during the Victorio Campaign. It would be the last time the two would meet. Throughout this period, his military career was encumbered by racism in the military, though he did have the support of some officers like Nolan and many of the white civilians he encountered who were impressed by his competency. In the later part of 1880 Flipper was transferred to Fort Davis and assigned as the post quartermaster and commissary officer. [ End of military career ] Colonel William Rufus Shafter [ Shafter, William Rufus The Handbook of Texas Online http://www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/SS/fsh2.html 5 September 2009 ] { Shafter, Texas (1884) is named after Colonel Shafter. It is located some eighteen miles north of Presido on U.S. Highway 67, at the east end of the Chinati Mountains. John W. Spencer found silver ore there and took it to Fort Davis to be assayed. It was determined to be worth $45 per ton. In October 1880 Shafter and two officers who later sat on on Flipper&apos;s court-martial began buying land around the Spencer claim. They were unable to buy several sections of lands because they lacked capital. In late June 1882 they organized &quot; Presidio Mining Company &quot; and the remaining sections were bought. Allegations of where Shafter got the money from over the next year were squashed. No investigation was ever conducted. Colonel Shafter continued his career until he retired in 1900 as a Major General of Volunteers. } assumed command at Fort Davis in March 1881. He had been the commander of the First Infantry Regiment at Fort Davis. Shafter had a reputation as harassing officers he disliked. While he tolerated black Buffalo Soldiers, he hated seeing a black officer. Flipper was dismissed without cause as quartermaster within days. Then Shafter &quot; asked &quot; Flipper to keep the quartermaster&apos;s safe in his quarters. Being &quot; asked &quot; by a superior officer was a de facto order and Flipper complied. In July 1881 Flipper found a shortage of over $2,000.00. Realizing that this could be used against him by officers intent on forcing him out of the army, he attempted to hide the discrepancy, which was later discovered, then he lied about it when confronted. In August he was arrested by Shafter for embezzling government funds. Word quickly spread about the missing money. Many felt it was a setup and soldiers and the community came up with the money to replace what was missing within four days. Shafter accepted the money then convened a court-martial on 17 September 1881. In December 1881 the court-martial found Flipper innocent of the main charge. But another charge had been added during the trial which they found him guilty &quot; of conduct unbecoming an officer and gentleman, &quot; and sentenced him to be &quot; dismissed from the service of the United States. &quot; It was more than a harsh sentence. In two prior situations involving white officers who were found guilty of embezzlement, neither officer was dismissed nor dishonored. The letters exchanged between Miss Mollie Dwyer and Flipper were used against him. Relationships between whites and blacks were strictly forbidden in the viewpoint of the white officers on the board. Despite appeals, and denial of a lighter sentence from President Chester A. Arthur, Flipper was drummed out of the army with a dismissal, the officer equivalent of a dishonorable discharge, on 30 June 1882. For the rest of his life, Flipper contested the charges and fought to regain his commission. [ Post military ] { Thomasville, Georgia } After his dismissal, Flipper remained in Texas, working as a civil engineer. In 1898, he volunteered to serve in the Spanish-American War, but requests to restore his commission were ignored by Congress. He spent time in Mexico, and on returning to the United States, he served as an advisor to Senator Albert Fall on the revolutionary politics in that country. When Fall became Secretary of the Interior in 1921, he brought Flipper with him to Washington, D.C. to serve as his assistant. In 1923 Flipper went to work in Venezuela as an engineer in the petroleum industry. He retired to Atlanta in 1931, and died in 1940. [ Legacy ] circa 1900 In 1976 descendants and supporters applied to the Army Board for the Correction of Military Records on behalf of Flipper. The Board, after stating that it did not have the authority to overturn his court-martial conviction, concluded the conviction and punishment were &quot; unduly harsh and unjust &quot; and recommended that Flipper’s dismissal be changed to a good conduct discharge. The Assistant Secretary of the Army (Manpower and Reserve Affairs) and the Adjutant General approved the Board&apos;s findings, conclusions, and recommendations and directed that the Department of the Army issue Flipper a Certificate of Honorable Discharge, dated 30 June 1882, in lieu of his dismissal on the same date. On 21 October 1997, a private law firm filed an application of pardon with the Secretary of the Army on Flipper&apos;s behalf. Seven months later, the application was forwarded by the Acting Assistant Secretary of the Army (Manpower and Reserve Affairs) to the Office of the Pardon Attorney at the Department of Justice with a recommendation that the pardon be approved. Many pardon applications had been rejected in the past – as a matter of policy – because the intended recipients were deceased. However, President Bill Clinton pardoned Flipper on 19 February 1999. After his discharge was changed, a bust of Flipper was unveiled at West Point. Since then, an annual Henry O. Flipper Award has been granted to graduating cadets at the Academy who exhibit &quot; leadership, self-discipline, and perseverance in the face of unusual difficulties. &quot; Throughout his life, Flipper was a prolific author, writing about scientific topics, the history of the Southwest, and his own experiences. In The Colored Cadet at West Point (1878) he describes his experiences at the military academy. In the posthumous Negro Frontiersman: The Western Memoirs of Henry O. Flipper (1963), he describes his life in Texas and Arizona after his discharge from the army. [ See also ] [ United States Army Biography ] List of African-American firsts [ Notes ] [ n 30em ] [ References ] [ Further reading ] [ Henry_Ossian_Flipper Henry Ossian Flipper ] Lieutenant Henry Ossian Flipper, U.S. Army 1856–1940 at the United States Army Center of Military History Additional information on famous presidential pardons. [ External links ] The Colored Cadet at West Point. Autobiography of Lieut. Henry Ossian Flipper, U.S. A., First Graduate of Color from the U.S. Military Academy. New York: H. Lee &amp; co., 1878. Lt. Flipper: The First Black Graduate of West Point Henry O. Flipper Dinner Encyclopedia of Oklahoma History and Culture – Flipper, Henry O. Henry Flipper: Groundbreaking Graduate US Army [ n/82/081669 ] [ Flipper, Henry Ossian first black American cadet to graduate from the United States Military Academy 21 March 1856 Thomasville, Georgia 3 May 1940 ] Category:African-American military personnel Category:American military personnel of the Spanish–American War Category:American slaves Category:Buffalo Soldiers Category:Clark Atlanta University alumni Category:People from Thomas County, Georgia Category:Recipients of American presidential pardons Category:United States Army officers Category:United States Military Academy alumni Category:1856 births Category:1940 deaths fr:Henry Ossian Flipper fi:Henry Flipper tl:Henry Ossian Flipper