[ capitalization March 2012 ] [ July 2010 March 2009 March 2009 March 2009 March 2009 ] [ 中國國歌百年演變史話 http://cpc.people.com.cn/BIG5/64162/64172/85037/85040/6653698.html Communist Party of China News Communist Party of China 21 May 2012 Communist Party of China News Chinese 1997-2006 ] { Chinese } { Irreligious  / } { State atheism } [ zh ong 1 h ua 2 - s u 1 wei 2 ai 1 - g ong 4 h e 2 g uo 2 ] { Chunghua Suwei&apos;ai Kunghekuo } The Chinese Soviet Republic (CSR, [ 中華蘇維埃共和國 中华苏维埃共和国 Zhōnghuá Sūwéi&apos;āi Gònghéguó ] ), also known as the Soviet Republic of China or the China Soviet Republic, and often referred to in historical literature as the Jiangxi Soviet (after its largest component territory, the Jiangxi-Fujian Soviet ), was a state established in November 1931 by future Communist Party of China leader, Mao Zedong, general Zhu De and others. The Republic lasted until 1937 and its other discontiguous territories were: Northeastern Jiangxi Soviet Hunan-Jiangxi Soviet Hunan-Hubei-Jiangxi Soviet Hunan-Western Hubei Soviet Hunan-Hubei-Sichuan-Guizhou Soviet Shaanxi-Gansu Soviet Szechuan-Shensi Soviet Hubei-Henan-Anhui Soviet Honghu Soviet Haifeng-Lufeng Soviet in eastern Guangdong, China&apos;s first Soviet territory, had been dismantled before the declaration of the CSR and is considered a predecessor rather than a constituent part. Mao Zedong was both CSR state chair and prime minister, simultaneously leading the state as well as its government. It was Zedong&apos;s time as the head of a &quot; small state within a state &quot; [ May 2012 ] that provided him with experience in mobile warfare and peasant organization; it was this experience that assisted him to eventually accomplish the communist reunification of China in the late 1940s. [ May 2012 ] The CSR was eventually destroyed by the Kuomintang (KMT)&apos;s National Revolutionary Army in a series of encirclement campaigns in 1937. [ May 2012 ] [ Establishment ] On November 7, 1931, the anniversary of the 1917 Russian Bolshevik Revolution, a National Soviet People&apos;s Delegates Conference was held in Ruijin (瑞金), Jiangxi province. Ruijin had been selected as the national capital and the Republic had received assistance from the Soviet Union to accommodate the gathering. The &quot; Chinese Soviet Republic &quot; (Chinese: &quot; 中華蘇維埃共和國 &quot; ) was born, even though the majority of China was still under the control of the nationalist Government of the Republic of China. On that day, they had an open ceremony for the new country, and Mao Zedong and other communists attended the military parade. Because it had its own bank, printed its own money, collected tax through its own tax bureau, therefore, it is considered as the beginning of Two Chinas. With Mao Zedong as both head of state ( &quot; 國家主席 &quot;, &apos;state chairman&apos;) and government ( &quot; 總理 &quot;, prime minister), the Jiangxi Soviet gradually expanded, reaching a peak of more than 30,000 square kilometres and a population that numbered more than three million, covering considerable parts of two provinces (with Tingzhou in Fujian ). Furthermore, its economy was doing better than most areas that were under the control of the Chinese warlords. In addition to the militia and guerilla, its regular Chinese Red Army alone already numbered more than 140,000 by the early 1930s, and they were better armed than most Chinese warlords&apos; armies at the time. For example, not only did the Chinese Red Army already have modern communication means such as telephones, telegraphs and radios which most Chinese warlords&apos; armies still lacked, it was already regularly transmitting wireless messages in codes and breaking nationalist codes. Only Chiang Kai-shek &apos;s army could match this formidable communist force. The Kuomintang (KMT), led by Chiang Kai-shek, felt threatened by the Soviet republic and led other Chinese warlords to have the National Revolutionary Army besiege the Soviet Republic repeatedly, launching what Chiang and his fellow nationalists called encirclement campaigns at the time, while the communists called their counter attacks counter encirclement campaigns. Chiang Kai-shek&apos;s first, second and third encirclement campaigns were defeated by the Chinese Red Army led by Mao. However, after the third counter encirclement campaign, Mao was removed from the leadership and replaced by the Chinese communists returning from the Soviet Union such as Wang Ming, and the command of the Chinese Red Army was handled by a three man committee that included Wang Ming&apos;s associates Otto Braun (Li De), the Comintern military advisor, Bo Gu, and Zhou Enlai. The Jiangxi Soviet thus began its inevitable rapid downfall under their policy of extreme leftism and incompetent military command, though the new leadership could not immediately rid itself of Mao&apos;s influence which prevailed during the fourth encirclement campaign, and thus saved the communists temporarily. However, as a result of the complete dominance the new communist leadership achieved after the fourth counter encirclement campaign, the Red Army was nearly halved, with most its equipment lost during Chiang&apos;s fifth encirclement campaign, started in 1933 and orchestrated by his German advisors, that involved the systematic encirclement of the Jiangxi Soviet region with fortified blockhouses. This method proved to be very effective. In an effort to break the blockade, the Red Army under the orders of the three man committee besieged the forts many times but suffered heavy casualties with little success, resulting in the Jiangxi Soviet shrinking significantly in size due to the Chinese Red Army&apos;s disastrous manpower and material losses. [ The State Apparatus ] [ Intelligence ] The communists seemed to be doomed under the crushing blows of the nationalists. However, Zhou Enlai had previously achieved a brilliant intelligence success by planting more than a dozen moles in Chiang Kai-shek &apos;s inner circle, including at the general headquarters for the nationalist forces at Nanchang. Surprisingly, the most important of the agents, Mo Xiong (莫雄), was actually never a communist, but his contribution eventually saved the Communist Party of China and the Chinese Red Army. Under the recommendation of Chiang Kai-shek&apos;s secretary-general Yang Yongtai (楊永泰), who was unaware of Mo&apos;s communist activities, Mo Xiong (莫雄) steadily excelled in Chiang Kai-shek&apos;s regime, eventually becoming an important member within Chiang Kai-shek&apos;s general headquarters in the early 1930s. In January 1934, Chiang Kai-shek named him as the administrator and commander-in-chief of the Fourth Special District in northern Jiangxi. Mo used his position to plant more than a dozen communist agents within Chiang&apos;s general headquarters, including Liu Yafo (劉亞佛),the communist who first introduced to the Communist Party of China, Xiang Yunian (項與年) his communist handler, whom he hired as his secretary, and Lu Zhiying (盧志英), the communist agent who was the acting head of the spy ring, which was directly under the command of Zhou Enlai. After successfully besieging the adjacent regions of Ruijin, the capital of the Jiangxi Soviet, and occupying most of Jiangxi Soviet itself, Chiang was confident that he would finish off the communists in a final decisive strike. In late September 1934, Chiang distributed his top secret plan named &quot; Iron Bucket Plan &quot; to everyone in his general headquarter at Lushan (the alternative summer site to Nanchang ), which detailed the final push to totally annihilate the communist forces. The plan was to build 30 blockade lines supported by 30 barbed wire fences, most of them electric, in the region 150  km around Ruijin, to starve the communists. In addition, more than 1,000 trucks were to be mobilized to form a rapid reaction force in order to prevent any communist breakout. Realizing the certain annihilation of the communists, Mo Xiong (莫雄) handed the document weighing several kilograms to his communist handler Xiang Yunian (項與年) the same night he received it, risking not only his own life, but that of his entire family. With the help of Liu Yafo (劉亞佛) and Lu Zhiying (盧志英), the communist agents copied the important intelligence onto four dictionaries and Xiang Yunian (項與年) was tasked to take the intelligence personally to the Jiangxi Soviet. The trip was hazardous, as the nationalist force would arrest and even execute anyone who attempted to cross the blockade. Xiang Yunian (項與年) was forced to hide in the mountains for a while, and then used rocks to knock out 4 of his own teeth, resulting in swollen face. Disguised as a beggar, he tore off the covers of the four dictionaries and hid them at the bottom of his bag with rotten food, then successfully crossed several lines of the blockade and reached Ruijin on October 7, 1934. The valuable intelligence provided by Mo Xiong (莫雄) finally convinced the communists in Jiangxi Soviet to abandon its base and started a general retreat before Chiang could complete the building of his blockade lines with supporting barbed wire fences, and mobilizing trucks and troops, thus saving themselves from total annihilation. [ Bank and currency ] February 1 of 1932, National Bank of Chinese Soviet Republic was established with Mao Zemin as its president. The CSR Central Mint issued three kinds of currency, including the paper bill, the copper coin, and the silver dollar. [ Banknotes ] One yuan bill with Vladimir Lenin&apos;s image in the centre. The Central Mint briefly issued both the paper bills and copper coins, but neither circulated for long, primarily because the currency could not be used in the rest of China. The paper bill had the Chinese Soviet Republic (中華蘇維埃共和國) printed on the bill in traditional Chinese character s, and a picture of Vladimir Lenin. [ Copper coin ] Like the paper bill, the copper coins issued by the Central Mint also had the Chinese Soviet Republic (中華蘇維埃共和國) in the traditional Chinese character engraved, and due to the fact that the coin lasts longer than the paper bill, these coins were issued and circulated in much greater numbers. However, these coins are currently rarer than the paper bill, mainly because the copper used was in dire need to make cartridge s so that these copper coins were recalled and replaced by silver dollar s. [ Silver dollar ] The largest and most predominant currency produced by the Central Mint was the silver dollar. Unlike the paper bills and the copper coins, the silver dollars had no communist symbols and instead, they were the direct copy of other silver dollars produced by other mints in China, including the most popular Chinese silver dollar with Yuan Shikai &apos;s head engraved, and the eagle silver dollar of the Mexican peso. This and the fact that the coin was made of the precious metal silver, enabled them to be circulated in the rest of China and thus was the trade currency of choice. When the Chinese Red Army&apos;s First Front began their Long March in October 1934, the communist bank was part of the retreating force, with 14 bank employees, over a hundred coolies and a company of soldiers escorting them while they carried all of the money and mint machinery. One of the important tasks of the bank during the Long March whenever the Chinese Red Army stayed in a place for longer than a day was to tell the local population to exchange any communist paper bills and copper coins to goods and currency used in nationalist controlled regions, so that the local population would not be persecuted by the pursuing nationalists after the communists had left. After the Zunyi Conference, it was decided that carrying the entire bank on the march was not practical, so on January 29, 1935, at Earth Town (Tucheng, 土城), the bank employees burned all communist paper bills and mint machinery under order. By the time the Long March had concluded in October 1935, only 8 out of the 14 original employees survived; the other 6 had died along the way. [ Tax bureau ] In November 1931, the National Tax Bureau was founded. Red Tourism: In 2002, the original building was fixed for people to visit. [ Postal Administration ] The Directorate General of Chinese Soviet Posts was founded at Ruijin on May 1, 1932. { The Postage Stamp Catalogue of the Chinese People&apos;s Revolutionary Period, published by Chinese Postage Stamp Museum } The first stamps were designed by Huang Yaguang and printed lithographically by the Printing House of the Ministry of Finance in Ruijin. White paper or newspaper was used. They were imperforate and denominated in the Chinese Soviet silver dollar currency. They are all fairly rare and highly sought after by collectors. There are also many forgeries and bogus issues imitating the early stamps of the communist areas. [ Collapse of Jiangxi Soviet and Long march ] On October 10, 1934, the three-man committee communist leadership formally issued the order of the general retreat, and on October 16, 1934, the Chinese Red Army begun what was later known as the Long March, fully abandoning the Jiangxi Soviet. 17 days after the main communist force had already left its base, the nationalists were finally aware that the enemy had escaped after reaching the empty city of Ruijin on November 5, 1934. Contrary to the common erroneous belief, the original destination was He Long &apos;s communist base in Hubei, and the final destination Yan&apos;an was not decided on until much later during the Long March, well after the rise of Mao Zedong. To avoid panic, the goal was kept a secret from most people, including Mao Zedong, and the public was told that only a portion of the Chinese Red Army would be engaged in mobile warfare to defeat nationalist forces, and thus this part of the army would be renamed as the “Field Army”. By the fall of 1934, the communists faced total annihilation. This situation had already convinced Mao Zedong and his supporters to believe that the communists should abandon their bases in the Jiangxi Soviet republic. However, the communist leadership stubbornly refused to accept the inevitable failure and still daydreamed of defeating the victorious nationalist forces. The three man committee devised a plan of diversions, and then a regroup after a temporary retreat. Once the regroup was complete, a counterattack would be launched in conjunction with the earlier diversion forces, driving the enemy out of the Jiangxi Soviet. The first movements of the retreating diversion were undertaken by Fang Zhimin. Fang Zhimin and his deputy, Xun Weizhou, were first to break through Kuomintang lines in June, followed by Xiao Ke in August. These movements surprised the Kuomintang, who were numerically superior to the communists at the time and did not expect an attack on their fortified perimeter. However, things did not turn out as the communists had hoped: Fang Zhimin&apos;s force was crushed after its initial success, and with Xun Weizhou killed in action, nearly every commander in this force was wounded and captured alive, including Fang Zhimin himself, and all were executed later by the nationalists. The only exception was Su Yu, who managed to escape. Xiao Ke fared no better: although his force initially managed to break through and then reached He Long &apos;s communist base in Hubei, but even with their combined forces, they were unable to challenge the far superior nationalist force besieging the Jiangxi Soviet, never to return until the establishment of the People&apos;s Republic of China 15 years later. The failure of the diversion forces resulted in their loss of contacts with the Jiangxi Soviet, and the communist leadership failed to coordinate its next proper move in a timely fashion, still believing that a temporary retreat near or within the Jiangxi Soviet would allow them to recover and counterattack, eventually driving out the nationalist force. [ the Main Retreating Force ] The portion of the First Front Red Army engaged in the so-called mobile warfare was actually the bulk of the communist force making a general retreat, but this force was only much diminished from its peak of more than 140,000 men army. With most of its equipment lost, many of the surviving members of the Chinese Red Army were forced to arm themselves with ancient weaponry. According to the Statistical Chart of the Field Army Personnel, Weaponry, Ammunition, and Supply completed by the Chinese Red Army on October 8, 1934, two days before the Long March begun, the Communist Long March force consisted of: [ Combat formations ] The 1st Corps (The largest of the five, with 19,880 combatants) The 3rd Corps The 5th Corps The 8th Corps (The newest and smallest of the five, with 10,922 combatants) The 9th Corps { 2 } { Columns } Central Committee 1st Column Central Committee 2nd Column { The 5 corps and the 2 columns had a total of 86,859 combatants. } [ Weaponry ] The Statistical Chart of Field Army Personnel, Weaponry, Ammunition, and Supply (Currently kept at the People&apos;s Liberation Army&apos;s Archives) also provided the weaponry and provisions prepared for the Long March, and the weapons deployed included: Mortar : 38 Mountain gun : 1 (originally not included, but was added later on) { Breechloading Firearms : 33,244 total (with 1,858,156 rounds of munition), and of these, a total of 29,016 were distributed to the 5 corps, including: } Rifle s : 25,317 Heavy machine gun s : 333 Light machine gun s : 285 Submachine gun s : 28 Handgun s : 2,804 { Other weapons included: } Lance : 6,101 Chinese saber : 882 { Various weapons were also deployed but their numbers were not counted, and these included: } muzzle-loading rifled muskets and smoothbore muskets Flintlock and Snaphance guns Matchlock and Wheellock guns Spear s and rakes (though later during the Long March, spear s were most useful as canes) Axe s and pole s (though later during the Long March, poles were most useful as building material such as that for stretchers) dagger s and knives Winter clothing: 83,100 sets Horse s : 338 Herbal medicine: 35,700 kg Salt : 17,413  kg Money: 1.642 million dollars of the Soviet Republic. [ Dissolution ] The Chinese Soviet Republic continued to exist formally after the fall of the Jiangxi Soviet, as the communists still controlled some areas like the Hubei-Henan-Shaanxi Soviet. Bao&apos;an was for a time the Soviet Republic&apos;s capital, until the communist government was moved to Yan&apos;an. The Chinese Soviet Republic was officially dissolved on 22 September 1937, when the Chinese Communist Party issued, in the context of the Second United Front, its manifesto on unity with the Kuomintang, as the Second Sino-Japanese War was only a few weeks old. { Lyman P. Van Slyke, The Chinese Communist movement: a report of the United States War Department, july 1945, Stanford University Press, 1968, p. 44 } The Chinese Communist Party remained, however, de facto in control of Yan&apos;an, which remained its stronghold for the remainder of the war with Japan. [ See also ] [ zh 中華蘇維埃共和國憲法大綱 Constitution of Chinese Soviet Republic ] [ Chinese Soviet Republic ] Two Chinas National Revolutionary Army Whampoa Military Academy History of the Republic of China Military of the Republic of China History of China Politics of the People&apos;s Republic of China Chinese political parties Futian incident Anti-Bolshevik League incident China&apos;s Red Army Marches, an English-language report on the Jiangxi Soviet [ Notes and references ] Yang&apos;s Postage Stamp Catalogue of The People&apos;s Republic of China (Liberated Area) [ External links ] Preface to Fundamental Laws of the Chinese Soviet Repub flags from FOTW website coins 12 stamps (explanatory caption in Simplified Chinese ) Category:1931 establishments Category:1937 disestablishments Category:20th century in China Category:Chinese Civil War Category:Communism Category:Former socialist republics Category:Government of China Category:Former countries in East Asia Category:States and territories established in 1931 da:Kinesiske sovjetrepublik es:República Soviética de China fr:République soviétique chinoise gan:中華蘇維埃共和國 ko:중화소비에트공화국 ka:ჩინეთის საბჭოთა რესპუბლიკა nl:Jiangxi Sovjet ja:中華ソビエト共和国 no:Den kinesiske sovjetrepublikk pl:Chińska Republika Rad pt:República Soviética da China ro:Republica Sovietică Chineză ru:Китайская Советская Республика sv:Kinesiska sovjetrepubliken zh:中华苏维埃共和国