[ Peter Morland Churchill image 1909 Amsterdam 1972 Cambridge Le Rouret, France Michel and Raoul United Kingdom 1940−1945 Captain Army Army Intelligence Corps Special Operations Executive World War II Distinguished Service Order Croix de Guerre 162707 ] Peter Morland Churchill DSO Croix de Guerre (1909–1972) was an SOE Officer in France during World War II. He was a brother of Group Captain Walter Churchill DSO DFC and Major Oliver Churchill DSO MC who was also an SOE Officer during World War II. [ Biography ] His father was William Algernon Churchill (1865–1947) a British Consul who served in Amsterdam, Stockholm, and Milan. His father was also an art connoisseur, and author of what is still the standard reference work on early European paper and papermaking, Watermarks in Paper, { Watermarks in Paper } and his mother Violet (née Myers). Peter was born in Amsterdam on 14 January 1909. He was educated at Malvern School and read Modern Languages at Caius College, Cambridge. In addition to his native English, he was bilingual in French, and fluent in Spanish, Italian and German. { SOE Personal File at National Archives } He also excelled in sports - he was Captain of the Cambridge University Ice Hockey Club in 1932 and won 15 international caps, proficient at exhibition diving, was a first-class skier, and played golf off a six handicap. {.He moved into the British diplomatic service and served as British Vice-Consul in Holland from 1934-5, Pro-Consul in } { Oran, Algeria from 1935-6, and from September 1939 to August 1940 was Under Secretary to Sir Norman Birkett in the Home Office Advisory Committee, and later became President of the Committee, and was very well acquainted with Prime Minister } { Winston Churchill &lt; ref name= &quot; nationalarchives.gov.uk &quot; } [ Wartime activities ] After the outbreak of World War II he became an Intelligence Officer and joined the Special Operations Executive in June 1941 and assigned to the French Section. His code names were &quot; Michel &quot;, “Raoul” and &quot; Pierre Olivier &quot;.He was infiltrated into France four times, twice by submarine and twice by aircraft. On 1 January 1942 he was landed at Miramar in France by submarine to supply and evaluate the &apos;&apos;Carte&apos;&apos; circuit of the Maquis and French Resistance, returning to England through Spain on 14 February. After he returned he was promoted to Captain. On 1 March 1942 he landed in the south of France by submarine to deliver four other people. On 27 August 1942 he was parachuted into the south of France and went to Cannes to organise and coordinate the SOE F Section &apos;Spindle&apos; Network. He developed a close relationship with his French courier Odette Sansom. The Spindle Network directed the delivery of supplies to support Carte. After Churchill&apos;s unsuccessful attempts to arrange for an aircraft to pick up himself and members of the Carte network, he relocated the Spindle network to Annecy. He returned to the UK on 23 March 1943. Eventually the Abwehr infiltrated Spindle. Churchill went to England on 23–24 March 1943 and on 15 April parachuted back into the mountains above Saint-Jorioz on the banks of Lake Annecy, however he and Sansom were arrested two days later in St Jorioz by Hugo Bleicher of Abwehr. Churchill and Sansom claimed they were a married couple and related to Winston Churchill to make themselves seem more valuable prisoners and less likely to be executed as spies. They were sent to different concentration camps where they were tortured and sentenced to death, but both escaped execution. Churchill was initially taken to the German barracks in Annecy, then taken to Fresnes where he remained until 13 February 1944 when he was transferred to Berlin for questioning. On 2 May he was sent to Sonderlager “A” Sachsenhausen where he was held in solitary confinement for 318 days out of 11 months. On 1 April 1945 he was moved by train to Flossenbürg, 50 miles south-east of Bayreuth, where he was held for 3–4 days before being taken by truck and Black Maria on a 30 hour trip to Dachau where, rather than being taken to the notorious concentration camp, he was lodged in a brothel along with other officers, and there made the acquaintance of Gen Garibaldi and his Chief of Staff Col Ferraro. As an officer he was given better treatment than most of the 22,000 inmates of Flossenburg who were forcibly evacuated on the 220  km death march to Dachau concentration camp during which a third died. The next day, as the Americans were approaching Dachau, he and 30 other officers were taken by bus to Innsbruck where he was held in the Straflager. They were joined by 140 other notable prisoners including former Austrian Chancellor, Dr. Kurt Schuschnigg. On 24 April 1945 Churchill was taken from Dachau over the Brenner Pass to Villabassa ( Niederdorf in the Tyrol ), together with many other prominent concentration camp inmates from different countries, { georg-elser-arbeitskreis.de (German) } where the SS left the prisoners behind as American forces were approaching. On 27 April he was taken 15 miles to the south to Wildsee, where on 4 May he was liberated by the Fifth U.S. Army. He was taken to Naples for debriefing by officers from the Crimes Investigations Departments and testified against his former captors, and on 12 May 1945 was flown back to England in the private plane of Air-Marshall Garrow. Odette was sent to Ravensbrück where she endured terrible torture but revealed nothing to her captors. { Odette Hallowes Wikipedia page } [ This officer carried out four clandestine missions into France between the end of 1941 and the spring of 1943. He was first landed by submarine in the south of France in December 1941 with the mission of contacting the principal organisers in the unoccupied zone, to bring them directives, remedy their various difficulties, improve communications and arrange help for arrested members of the organisation. This involved much travel and dangerous liaisons activity, but CHURCHILL carried out the mission with complete success and return to England in early February 1942. His second mission was to organise the infiltration of a number of agents by sea into the South of France. Although this involved a short stay in France, it was nevertheless a delicate and hazardous task. It was mainly due to CHURCHILL&apos;s courage and resourcefulness that the operation was successfully carried out. In April 1942 he was parachuted into France as chief liaison officer to a large resistance group in the south. He worked here for several months organising parachute dropping operations and the reception of agents by sea on the Mediterranean coast. His operations were always well organised and he took great personal risks to ensure the safe disposal of infiltrated agents. In March 1943 Capt. Churchill paid a short visit to England for consultation. Two months after his return to France in May 1943, he was arrested. By that time he had decentralised the organisation to such an extent that his work could be continued by others. He was released by Allied troops in Germany in May 1945. Capt. Churchill worked tirelessly and unselfishly over a long period in very trying conditions, showing outstanding courage, leadership and organising ability, which earned him the respect and admiration of all who came in contact with him. It is strongly recommended that he is appointed a Companion in the Distinguished Service Order. Maj. Gen. C. McV. Gubbins - Recommendation for DSO ] [ Post war ] Peter Churchill and Odette Sansom were married in 1947 but divorced in 1956. Peter continued to live in France after the war, settling in Le Rouret near Cannes where he worked in real estate, and lived there until his death in 1972. [ Decorations ] Distinguished Service Order Croix de Guerre (French) [ References ] [ SOE Personal File at National Archives ] Books by Peter Churchill: Of Their Own Choice (1952) Duel of Wits (1953) The Spirit of the Cage (1954) By Moonlight (1958) All About the French Riviera (1960) [ External links ] Profile of Peter Churchill Special Forces Roll of Honour Peter Churchill on French Wikipedia site (French) Five images of Peter Churchill and Odette at Getty Images Portrait of Peter Churchill by Mark Gerson at National Portrait Gallery, London [ Churchill, Peter 1909 Amsterdam 1972 Cambridge ] Category:1909 births Category:1972 deaths Category:People educated at Malvern School Category:Special Operations Executive personnel Category:French Resistance members Category:People from Amsterdam Category:Sachsenhausen concentration camp survivors fr:Peter Churchill