[ yes 1857 7 24 ] { Hacienda La Mulera, } { Táchira, } { Venezuela } [ yes 1935 12 17 1857 7 24 ] { Maracay, } { Aragua, } { Venezuela } { Signature of Juan Vicente Gómez.jpg } Juan Vicente Gómez Chacón (24 July 1857 – 17 December 1935) was a military general and de facto ruler of Venezuela from 1908 until his death in 1935. He was president on three occasions during this time, and ruled as an unelected military strongman for the rest of the era. [ Biography ] [ Early years ] Gómez in 1899 { Cipriano Castro } { Eleazar López Contreras in 1934 } Gómez was a barely literate cattle herder and a nearly full-blooded Native American. In 1899, he joined the private army of Cipriano Castro, with whom he had been friends since Castro&apos;s exile in Colombia. This army swept down on Caracas in 1899 and seized control of the country. He became Castro&apos;s vice president and, in 1902, head of the military, responsible for suppressing several major revolts against the government. Gómez seized power from Castro on 19 December 1908, while Castro was in Europe for medical treatment. [ Presidency ] As president, Gómez managed to deflate Venezuela&apos;s staggering debt by granting concessions to foreign oil companies after the discovery of petroleum in Lake Maracaibo in 1918. This, in turn, won him the support of the United States and Europe and economic stability. Though he used the money to launch an extensive public works program, he also received generous kickbacks, increasing his personal fortune enormously. Because of his contributions to the country&apos;s development, the Congress bestowed the title of El Benemérito (the Meritorious One) on him. In contrast, his opponents, who disdained his brutal tactics at home, referred to him as El Bagre (the Catfish ), a snide reference to his bushy moustache and outward appearance. They also called him &quot; the Tyrant of the Andes &quot; - a reference to his roots in the mountain state of Táchira. On 19 April 1914, Gómez ostensibly stepped down from office in favor of provisional president Victorino Márquez, though he continued to rule the country from his home in Maracay. He returned to office in 1922, ruling until 22 April 1929. Though he was reelected to a new term of office by the Congress, he declined to return to the capital, and Juan Bautista Pérez assumed the presidency, though Gómez remained the final authority in the country. On 13 June 1931, Congress forced Perez to resign, and elected Gómez president again. This time, he resumed office, ruling the country until his death. [ Family ] Gómez was never married; however, he had two mistresses. The first one was Dionisia Gómez Bello, with whom he had seven children: José Vicente, Josefa, Alí, Flor de María, Graciela, Servilia, and Gonzalo. The second one was Dolores Amelia Núñez de Cáceres, with whom we had eight children: Juan Vicente, Florencio, Rosa Amelia, Hermenegilda, Cristina, Belén, Berta, and Juan Crisóstomo. Gómez also fathered many other children in brief relationships: at least 64 and possibly as many as 84. He appointed many of his children to public office, sparking charges of nepotism. [ Legacy ] Gómez&apos;s rule of Venezuela is a controversial period in the country&apos;s history. His cunning leadership brought enrichment to the country, particularly after the discovery of oil, which enabled the development of a modern infrastructure. His insistence on road construction and the creation of jobs in the then-new oil industry promoted population mobility and more frequent social contact among Venezuelans of different regions – previously a rare occurrence – which permanently rooted a sense of national unity in the country. { Caballero, Manuel (2007) Gómez, El Tirano Liberal 6th Edition. Alfadil Ediciones. } He brought about the end of civil wars and political insurrections by exerting power over regional caudillos and, as a result, Venezuela became a peaceful country and has been so for more than a century. Ironically, the elimination of the caudillo problem and the choosing of Eleazar López Contreras as his last minister of war and marine paved the way to the emergence of modern democracy; see Generation of 1928. He repaid all foreign and internal debt using excess reserves; his fiscal conservatism helped the country get through the Crash of 1929 and the Great Depression, and led to an increase in the value of the bolívar to the point of becoming hard currency. On the debit side, he is one of the prominent examples of U.S. domination in Latin America. During his rule, most of the country&apos;s wealth ended up in the hands of Gómez, his henchmen, and Wall Street. { Woddis, J. (1967). An Introduction to Neocolonialism London: Lawrance &amp; Wichart. } Indeed, at the time of his death, he was by far the richest man in the country. He did little for public education and held basic democratic principles in disdain. Although cordial and simple in manner, his ruthless crushing of opponents through his secret police earned him the reputation of a tyrant. He was also accused of trying to make the country a personal fief. Former Venezuelan President Rómulo Betancourt said in his book Venezuela: Oil and Politics that &quot; (...) Gomez was something more than a local despot, he was the instrument of foreign control of the Venezuelan economy, the ally and servant of powerful outside interests. &quot; This is in reference to Royal Dutch Shell and Standard Oil &apos;s appeasement of the dictator in return for exploration rights to the country&apos;s oil fields. In Venezuelan politics, Juan Vicente Gómez has come to symbolize political endurance and a caudillo mentality. He was quoted as saying he needed a lifetime to fulfill his political work. [ References ] [ External links ] [ Juan Vicente Gómez ] Biography at infoplease.com Venezuela – A Century of Caudillismo – A recount of the historical context, Gomez&apos;s career and influence. [ See also ] Venezuela Presidents of Venezuela [ August 2010 ] [ Gomez, Juan Vicente 24 July 1857 Hacienda La Mulera, Táchira, Venezuela 17 December 1935 Maracay, Aragua, Venezuela ] Category:Presidents of Venezuela Category:Vice Presidents of Venezuela Category:Venezuelan generals Category:People from Táchira Category:1857 births Category:1935 deaths cs:Juan Vicente Gómez de:Juan Vicente Gómez es:Juan Vicente Gómez fr:Juan Vicente Gómez ko:후안 비센테 고메스 it:Juan Vicente Gómez ka:ხუან ვისენტე გომესი nl:Juan Vicente Gómez ja:フアン・ビセンテ・ゴメス no:Juan Vicente Gómez pl:Juan Vicente Gómez pt:Juan Vicente Gómez ru:Гомес, Хуан Висенте sk:Juan Vicente Gómez fi:Juan Vicente Gómez sv:Juan Vicente Gómez tr:Juan Vicente Gómez yo:Juan Vicente Gómez zh:胡安·比森特·戈麦斯