[ Mesites Subdesert Mesite.jpg 255px Subdesert Mesite. Animal ia Chordata Aves Mesitornithiformes(but see article) Mesitornithidae Wetmore, 1960 Genera Mesitornis Monias Madagaskar-mesites-06.jpg 150px Respective ranges: Brown Mesite in orange, White-breasted Mesite in green and Subdesert Mesite in blue ] The mesites (Mesitornithidae) are a family of bird s of uncertain affinities. They are smallish, near flightless birds endemic to Madagascar. Generally brownish with paler undersides, they are of somewhat pheasant -like appearance and were initially placed with the Galliformes. Most commonly, they are placed in the Gruiformes ( crane s, rail s and allies), but this has been disputed in more recent times. They are the only family with more than two species in which every species is threatened; all three are listed as vulnerable and are expected to decline greatly in the next 20 years. [ March 2009 ] [ Biology ] They are forest and scrub birds which feed on insects and seeds. The Brown and White-breasted Mesites forage on the ground, gleaning insects from the leaves and under them, as well as low vegetation. The Subdesert Mesite uses its long bill to probe in the soil. Other birds, such as drongo s and flycatcher s [ June 2011 ], will follow mesites to catch any insects they flush and miss. Mesites are vocal birds, with calls similar to passerine song, used for territorial defence. Two or three white eggs are laid in a stick-nest located in a bush or low branch. [ Forshaw, Joseph Archibald, George W. 1991 Encyclopaedia of Animals: Birds Merehurst Press London 100–101 1-85391-186-0 ] The Mesitornis species are monogamous; Monias benschi is polygamous and unlike the other two shows significant sexual dichromatism. [ Taxonomy ] Historically, mesites have been allied with the dove s and the dipper s. While the latter is certainly incorrect, there is some indication that they might indeed be closer (though not very close) to the Columbiformes. The purported gruiforms Kagu and Sunbittern (and possibly the extinct adzebill s too) might also be not-too-distant relatives. These latter taxa, remarkably, were all only tentatively placed in the Gruiformes, and are apparently all of Gondwana n origin; like the mesites, the Kagu and Sunbittern are among the rather few birds possessing powder down. Still, the data hinting at a possible relationship between the &quot; odd gruiforms &quot; (and possibly pigeons) is by no means robust enough to draw a firm conclusion. (Fain &amp; Houde 2004) Arguably, they might be considered an order of their own (Mesitornithiformes) as has on occasion been done in the past, but unlike with the Hoatzin, little phylogenetic research has yet been conducted on mesites. The DNA study of Hackett et al. { A Phylogenomic Study of BirdsReveals Their Evolutionary History, Shannon J. Hackett et al., SCIENCE VOL 320 27 JUNE 2008 } suggested that the Mesites are a sister group of the doves, somewhat more distantly related to the sandgrouse, tropicbirds, grebes, and flamingos, within the proposed &quot; Metaves &quot; clade. Other researchers have been unable to confirm the &quot; Metaves &quot;. [ Systematics ] There are two genera, Mesitornis (2 species) and Monias (Subdesert Mesite). White-breasted Mesite, Mesitornis variegata Brown Mesite, Mesitornis unicolor Subdesert Mesite Monias benschi [ References ] [ 10.1554/04-235 ] Fain, Matthew G. &amp; Houde, Peter (2004): Parallel radiations in the primary clades of birds. Evolution 58(11): 2558-2573. PMID 15612298 PDF fulltext [ External links ] Subdesert Mesite (Ifaty, Madagascar) — a photo by Luke W.  Cole Mesite videos on the Internet Bird Collection * Category:Higher-level bird taxa restricted to the Malagasy region [ de ] br:Mesitornithidae ca:Mesitornítid de:Stelzenrallen es:Mesitornithidae fr:Mesitornithiformes it:Mesitornithidae ka:მეზიტისებრნი sw:Mesite hu:Lábasguvatfélék nl:Steltrallen ja:クイナモドキ科 nn:Mesittar oc:Mesitornithidae pl:Madagaskarniki pt:Mesitornithidae ru:Мадагаскарские пастушки fi:Kyyhkyrääkät sv:Duvrallar zh:拟鹑科