[ Gnateaters Conopophaga castaneiceps 3.jpg 200px Chestnut-crowned Gnateater (Conopophaga castaneiceps) Animal ia Chordata Aves Passeriformes Tyranni Conopophagidae Sclater &amp; Salvin, 1873 Genera Conopophaga Vieillot, 1816 Pittasoma Cassin, 1860 ] The gnateaters are a bird family, Conopophagidae, consisting of ten small passerine species in two genera, which occur in South and Central America. The family was formerly restricted to the gnateater genus Conopophaga; analysis of mtDNA cytochrome &apos;&apos;b&apos;&apos; and NADH dehydrogenase subunit 2 sequence s (Rice 2005a,b) indicates that the &quot; antpittas &quot; of the genus Pittasoma also belong in this family. The association between this genus and Conopophaga is also supported by traits in their natural history, morphology, and vocalizations (Rice, 2005a). The members of this family are very closely related to the antbird s and less closely to the antpitta s and tapaculo s. Due to their remote and dim habitat, gnateaters are a little-studied and poorly known family of birds, though they are often sought after by birdwatchers. [ Distribution and habitat ] { Black-cheeked Gnateater } Gnateaters are birds of the forest understory, bamboo stands, and the forest floor. The members of the genus Conopophaga are found in the Amazon and Orinoco basins, east and central Andean slopes, Atlantic Forest, and nearby regions, while the members of the genus Pittasoma are found in the Chocó, and Panama and Costa Rica. Some species live in impenetrable thickets; others live in more open forest. Most are entirely restricted to humid habitats, but several species extend into drier regions in eastern Brazil. While the members of the genus Conopophaga always are found near the forest floor, seldom rising more than 1.5 m above the ground, they also seldom travel or spend much time on the ground (though they do feed there; see diet). The members of the genus Pittasoma are more commonly seen hopping around on the ground. They are round, short-tailed, and long-legged birds, about 12–19  cm (5–7½ inches) in length, with Pittasoma being larger than Conopophaga. They are quite upright when standing. All species are sexually dimorphic, although the extent of this varies greatly. Most Conopophaga species have a white tuft behind the eye. [ Behaviour and ecology ] Gnateaters are insectivorous as the group name implies. The members of the genus Conopophaga feed mostly using two methods; one is to perch above the forest floor until prey is spotted, then lunge down to the ground to snatch it; having landed on the ground to snatch a prey item it will not remain on the forest floor for more than a couple of seconds. The second method used is to glean insects directly from the foliage, trunks, and branches of low vegetation. Typical prey items include spider s, caterpillar s, insect larvae, grasshopper s and beetle s; individuals of some species have also been observed eating fruit and in one case a frog. Very little information is available on the diet of the two Pittasoma, but they are presumably also insectivorous, and have been recorded following army ants swarms. [ Species list ] Family Conopophagidae : Rufous Gnateater, Conopophaga lineata Chestnut-belted Gnateater, Conopophaga aurita Hooded Gnateater, Conopophaga roberti Ash-throated Gnateater, Conopophaga peruviana Slaty Gnateater, Conopophaga ardesiaca Chestnut-crowned Gnateater, Conopophaga castaneiceps Black-cheeked Gnateater, Conopophaga melanops Black-bellied Gnateater, Conopophaga melanogaster Black-crowned Antpitta, Pittasoma michleri Rufous-crowned Antpitta, Pittasoma rufopileatum [ References ] [ 10.1650/7696.1 ] Rice, Nathan H. (2005a): Phylogenetic relationships of antpitta genera (Passeriformes: Formicariidae). Auk 122(2): 673-683. [English with Spanish abstract] DOI :10.1642/0004-8038(2005)122[0673:PROAGP]2.0.CO;2 PDF fulltext Rice, Nathan H. (2005b): Further Evidence for Paraphyly of the Formicariidae (Passeriformes). Condor 107(4): 910-915. [English with Spanish abstract] PDF fulltext Whitney, B.M. (2003) Family Conopophagidae (Gnateaters) pp 732–748 in del Hoyo J., Elliott A. &amp; Christie D.A. (2003) Handbook of the Birds of the World. Volume 8. Broadbills to Tapaculos Lynx Edicions, Barcelona ISBN 84-87334-50-4 [ External links ] Gnateater videos, photos and sounds on the Internet Bird Collection * * Category:Bird families Category:Genera of birds Category:Higher-level bird taxa restricted to the Neotropics * br:Conopophagidae ca:Conopofàgid de:Mückenfresser es:Conopophagidae eo:Konopofagedoj fr:Conopophagidae lt:Uodlesiniai hu:Szúnyogevőfélék nl:Muggeneters ja:アリサザイ科 nn:Myggetarar pl:Mrówkożery pt:Conopophagidae ru:Гусеницеедовые simple:Gnateater sv:Knottfåglar zh:食蚊鸟科