[ November 2011 ] [ ITV Yorkshire (2002-) Yorkshire Television (1968-2002) 200px Leeds, West Yorkshire Yorkshire from 1968, Lincolnshire from 1974 ITV plc 29 July 1968 180px 180px Former Yorkshire Television logos. Lost on-air identity 27 October 2002 (known as ITV1at all times) Granada Television (Monday morning to Friday evening) and ABC Weekend Television (Saturday morning to Sunday evening) ] ITV Yorkshire, previously known as Yorkshire Television and sometimes unofficially abbreviated to YTV, is the British television service provided by ITV Broadcasting Limited for the Yorkshire franchise area on the ITV network. Until 1974, this was primarily the three ridings of Yorkshire and associated areas served by the Emley Moor television transmitter. Following a re-organisation in 1974 the transmission area was extended to include Humberside, Lincolnshire and parts of Nottinghamshire, Derbyshire and North and West Norfolk, served by the Belmont transmitter. The 1967 franchise round stipulated that the influential pan-North region, the licence for which was owned by Granada Television based in Manchester, had to be split up. Consequently it was decided that Granada would keep the North West franchise and a new franchise created for Yorkshire. Two consortiums applied for the franchise, Telefusion Yorkshire Ltd and Yorkshire Independent Television, the former having large financial backing (supported by the Blackpool-based Telefusion television rental chain) and the latter having the better plans (but fewer resources). Yorkshire Television itself was formed via a &apos; shotgun marriage &apos; between the aforementioned two applicant groups. It went on air on 29 July 1968 from purpose-built colour studios in Leeds, the first of their kind in Europe. It also has smaller district offices in Hull and Lincoln. On 1 January 2007, the company transferred its programme production business to ITV Studios Limited. As a consequence, Yorkshire Television Limited ceased to trade on 1 January 2007. { Directors Report and Financial Statements, Yorkshire Television Limited, Year Ending 31st December 2006 } Yorkshire Television Ltd still legally exists, but its licence is now owned and operated by ITV plc under the licence name of ITV Broadcasting Limited (along with all the other ITV plc-owned franchises). [ History ] On 28 February 1967, national and regional newspapers carried numerous advertisements from the Independent Television Authority, each requesting applicants for various new ITV contracts, one of which was Programme Contractor for Yorkshire Area (Contract D) - All Week. Ten formal bids were received by the closing date; another less-serious bid, Diddy TV, headed by comedian Ken Dodd withdrew their application. [ How It All Began in Yorkshire, Volume 2 Maurice Baren Dalesman Publishing 2000 1-85568-183-8 ] [ December 2011 ] Telefusion Yorkshire Limited, created by the Blackpool -based TV rental chain Telefusion, was chosen on the condition that it &apos;merged&apos; with another applicant Yorkshire Independent Television. The latter, backed by a consortium of Yorkshire Post Newspapers Ltd, other local newspaper groups such as the Huddersfield Examiner and the Scarborough Evening News, several Yorkshire-based Co-operative societies, trade unions and local universities were deemed by the Authority to have the better talent but suffered a lack of funding, whereas Telefusion had the backing of a cash-rich parent. The new venture initially chose the name Yorkshire Television Network but decided to drop the word &apos;Network&apos; before going on air. The station began broadcasting on 29 July 1968 from brand new studios at Kirkstall Road in Leeds. Although they were purpose-built for colour production and equipped with £2.2 million of equipment, the majority of initial broadcasts were in monochrome until the ITV network formally launched its colour output on 15 November 1969. After an opening ceremony led by The Duchess of Kent, the station&apos;s first programme was live coverage of a Test cricket match between England and Australia at Headingey. Other programmes broadcast on YTV&apos;s opening day included the first edition of its regional news programme Calendar, the station&apos;s first networked production - the &apos;Playhouse&apos; drama Daddy Kiss it Better - and a light entertainment special, First Night, hosted by Bob Monkhouse. The station was hit hard when its transmitter mast at Emley Moor collapsed in March 1969 under a heavy build-up of ice, leaving the major part of the region uncovered by television broadcasts. However, a temporary mast was quickly erected and television to the West Riding of Yorkshire resumed, albeit with reduced coverage. From this, the company grew and by May 1970 the company was making profits of over £689,000 (2008 equivalent: £7.75  million). { Historic inflation calculator: how the value of money has changed since 1900 | This is Money } After a series of temporary masts at Emley Moor, the current 275 metre reinforced concrete tower — topped by a 55 metre steel lattice mast — began transmitting in 1971, resuming full area coverage for the YTV region. With the introduction of UHF broadcasting, YTV had failed to gain the Bilsdale transmitter in North Yorkshire, which was allocated instead to Tyne Tees Television due to the transmitter&apos;s penetration into Teesside and County Durham. This seriously reduced YTV&apos;s monopoly commercial broadcast area. Partially to address this issue, in 1974 the Independent Broadcasting Authority reallocated the Belmont Transmitter, then served by Anglia Television, to YTV. Although the area served by Belmont was largely rural, it did cover the more industrial centres of Hull, Grimsby, Scunthorpe and Lincoln and it was felt the region would be better served from Leeds rather than from Norwich. For the rest of Yorkshire&apos;s life, it would be subject to takeovers, mergers and reorganisations, starting in 1974 and continuing to this day. [ Trident Television ] In 1974 and following a reverse takeover Yorkshire Television was effectively merged with its neighbour Tyne Tees Television, when the two were brought under the control of Trident Television Limited, a company formed in 1969 to deal with the problem of effective ownership of the Bilsdale transmitter and the allocation of airtime. It is often contended that the other point of the trident was intended to be Anglia Television, but that in the event Anglia was prevented from joining by the Independent Broadcasting Authority. However, it appears that the third &apos;point&apos; was to be Trident&apos;s non-television interests and that Anglia were never considered as partners in the enterprise. The two stations remained separately run and were required to demerge by late 1982 as a condition of the re-awarding of their ITV contracts from January 1982. Trident&apos;s majority shareholdings were sold although they retained ownership of studios and equipment which were leased to the respective companies. [ Yorkshire-Tyne Tees Television plc ] Following rule changes in 1992, the two stations resumed their alliance under the name Yorkshire-Tyne Tees Television plc. This time around, the two stations were integrated to a far greater extent—following the takeover, 292 jobs were axed at the two broadcasters, { http://web.mac.com/spunter1/iWeb/Steve%20Punter%20Web%202/The%20Bumblebee%20Blog/48746E4C-1154-4479-A80E-CCC21BFB393E.html } [ December 2011 ] including 185 at Tyne Tees (over half the workforce), with a further 150 lost the following year. Yorkshire-Tyne Tees were repeatedly warned over worsening standards at the Newcastle-based station and at one point the Independent Television Commission (the then-governing body of ITV) threatened to revoke the Tyne Tees licence if the situation did not improve. In 1993 the MP Ann Clwyd described Tyne Tees as having been &quot; stripped of any meaningful identity since its take over by Yorkshire TV &quot; and Ian Ritchie, Managing Director at Tyne Tees, left the company over a widely publicised disagreement with the Yorkshire-Tyne Tees board over what he saw as an unacceptable drive to centralise the company [ August 2008 ]. The company faced a large revenue shortfall in 1993 of around £15  million, caused largely by financial irregularities in advertising sales, where airtime was oversold. Generally the bids submitted by both YTV and the (then-independent) Tyne Tees were considered financially questionable, and the ITC is said to have come close to rejecting the YTV bid on financial quality grounds. [ http://www.variety.com/article/VR116745.html?categoryid%3D19%26amp%3Bcs%3D1 Variety U.K.&apos;s Tyne Tees TV faces year loss Adam Dawtrey 9 November 1993 ] However, with London Weekend Television &apos;s airtime sales subsidiary Laser taking over the advertising responsibilities for the company, company profits did recover by 1996, thanks to the cost-cutting measures implemented in the intervening years. [ http://www.prnewswire.co.uk/cgi/news/release?id%3D27248 YORKSHIRE TYNE TEES TELEVISION PRE-TAX UP 40% PRN Newswire ] Various programmes which had previously been shown at a regional pace were suddenly jolted forward to the furthest ahead point among YTV and Tyne Tees. YTV had to lose over 200 episodes of The Young Doctors to reach the Tyne Tees stage of the serial. Similarly Tyne Tees had to lose over 100 episodes of Blockbusters and two episodes of Prisoner: Cell Block H. Other programmes were also affected. After Granada removed the Channel 3 branding, Yorkshire reverted back to its original theme. This particular logo had a darker version during the evenings. In 1996, Yorkshire-Tyne Tees Television made the controversial move of re-branding both of its networks under the unified brand &quot; Channel 3. &quot; While Yorkshire used a scaled-back version of this branding (still using the classic logo and being verbally known as &quot; Channel 3 Yorkshire &quot; ), Tyne Tees was re-branded as &quot; Channel 3 North East &quot;, dropped the familiar TTTV logo, and relegated the Tyne Tees name to secondary branding. [ Granada plc ] In 1997 Yorkshire-Tyne Tees Television plc was acquired by Granada Group plc (now ITV plc ). Granada&apos;s first move was to scrap the Channel 3 branding, starting from 9 March 1998. However, dual branding with the &quot; ITV &quot; name was introduced a year later. In 1998, transmission control and presentation for all of Granada&apos;s stations in the North of England moved to Yorkshire, with the creation of the Northern Transmission Centre. This highly automated server based system was the source to Border, Tyne Tees and Granada as well as the Yorkshire regional output. The continuity department closed down in 2002 after a unified presentation department for ITV1 in England was set up by the London News Network in London. On 28 October 2002, Yorkshire Television was rebranded as ITV1 Yorkshire. The &quot; Yorkshire &quot; does not appear, even before regional programmes; only the name &quot; ITV1 &quot; is shown. The famous chevron continued to appear after programmes made by ITV Yorkshire, until 31 October 2004. Today, programmes made at the Leeds studios by ITV are credited to ITV Studios. The license for Yorkshire is now held by ITV Broadcasting Limited, part of ITV plc. [ Studios ] [ The Leeds Studios ] Yorkshire Television studios The studios were built on [ 5 acre m2 ] of slum clearance land on Kirkstall Road, purchased from the former Leeds Corporation. Construction commenced in early 1967. A mild winter aided building work and by mid-1968 studios one and two were equipped for transmission (studios three and four being completed by early 1969). During construction, pre-launch shows were produced at the ABC studios at Didsbury, Manchester while a former trouser-press factory next to the Leeds facility was used as an administration centre. The studio was officially opened by The Duchess of Kent on 29 July 1968. It was the first purpose-built colour television production centre in Europe and cost over £4  million to build and equip (2008 equivalent: £50  million ). Equipment was installed by EMI Electronics and contained seven 2 &quot; Quadruplex VTR machines, six telecine s and twelve cameras. The cameras were a mixture of Marconi MkVII&apos;s and EMI 2001 models. { Calendar&apos;s &apos;&apos; studios within the } { Leeds complex. } The regional news show Calendar was produced at the centre for many years but in 1989 was moved to a dedicated newsroom and broadcast facility based in a converted ice rink next to the main studios. Recent productions include Countdown (which has since moved to The Manchester Studios), the revived Bullseye, Mastermind (while asbestos was removed from The Manchester Studios in 2006), My Parents Are Aliens, new Channel 4 gameshow Win My Wage and a new children&apos;s comedy-drama for Cartoon Network called My Spy Family. The site is now home to continuity for ITV&apos;s northern transmission areas (although this is now managed, along with its southern counterpart, by Technicolor Network Services ) and a number of independent producers. The production facilities are marketed as The Leeds Studios and sister companies ProVision, Film Lab North and The Finishing School occupy adjacent buildings, although the operation continues to be widely referred to as the Yorkshire Television studios or YTV. In March 2009, ITV plc announced that the Leeds Studios were to be largely closed in an effort to save costs following a reported loss of £2.7  billion for 2008. [ http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/business/7922770.stm Troubled ITV cuts jobs and costs 4 March 2009 2009-03-04 BBC News Online BBC ] However, seven months later ITV changed its mind, choosing instead to close the nearby studios dedicated to the production of Emmerdale and transferring production of this programme to Kirkstall Road which would be upgraded for HDTV production. [ http://www.yorkshirepost.co.uk/rip-yorkshire-tv/ITV39s-Leeds-base-saved-in.5883990.jp ITV&apos;s Leeds base saved in £5m refurbishment Yorkshire Post 3 December 2009 ] [ Identity ] The Yorkshire Chevron logo as used in 1996, throughout the Channel 3 era. Yorkshire Television&apos;s on screen identity has always revolved around the use of the station logo: the chevron. This yellow symbol was seen on nearly all Yorkshire television&apos;s station identification films, or idents for short. The first symbol used was a black and white chevron, formed by slit-scan techniques and accompanied by an orchestral version of the tune On Ilkla Moor Baht &apos;at, a famous tune in Yorkshire. This music was later to become the station&apos;s signature tune. This ident continued until Colour television arrived to the region in the 1970s. [ Piercy Robert Yorkshire TV idents http://www2.tv-ark.org.uk/itvyorkshire/idents.html TVARK TVARK 5 August 2011 ] { Contains videos of all of the YTV idents. } [ ITV1 Yorkshire http://thetvroom.com/itv/itv-yorkshire-01-01.html TV Room 5 August 2011 ] { Contains images of the idents } The new colour ident featured the yellow chevron on a black background with the caption Yorkshire Television Colour Production, which would appear suddenly, along with a simplified version of On Ilkla Moor Baht &apos;at. This ident was modified in 1981, so that the caption Colour Production was changed to In Colour, and in 1982 the colour caption was removed altogether. This new version also featured a deeper tune than previous. Supplementing the ident throughout this period were idents promoting the station&apos;s coverage, with the slogan Serving Six Million Viewers. One version, in 1983 featured a giant chevron logo, made up out of smaller chevrons, and another in 1986 featured the view zooming in from space, to the earth, to Britain and finally to the Yorkshire TV region, which then flipped over, becoming the chevron. This last version was computer animated, with 3D-style lettering and chevron. In 1986, Yorkshire Television introduced a new ident, entitled Liquid Gold, featuring a pool of liquefied gold, with the chevron rising up from it, and rotating into the sky, where the station name joins it. This ident features a fully orchestrated version of the theme tune and reportedly cost £40,000 to make in 1986. This was occasionally supplemented by a large rotating chevron over a gradiented blue background, used over continuity. In 1989, Yorkshire Television adopted the first ITV generic look, featuring the large ITV logo, which the company used until October 1994. The segment of the &apos;V&apos; in the ITV logo denoting the region, featured the left segment of the chevron. The whole package was used by Yorkshire Television, and an adapted version, where the whole chevron appeared in the V segment before moving into centre screen, was used before regional programming. Upon YTV dropping the generic look in 1994, a new ident was introduced, featuring a textured background with a strip across the centre of the screen containing images of the region itself, with the chevron placed in the centre of the strip. The most noticeable thing about his ident set was the smooth nature of the chevron&apos;s appearance, and also the fact that this was the only ident ever used by Yorkshire that did not feature the On Ilkla Moor Baht &apos;at theme music. Instead a smooth orchestral jingle was used, that mixed with the relaxed ident gave the station a relaxing feel. The background was later changed from a cream to a light blue, and variations on the theme for special occasions and yearly themes were also introduced. [ ITV1 Yorkshire Idents 2 http://thetvroom.com/itv/itv-yorkshire-01-05.html TV Room 5 August 2011 ] However, the look was not to last. In 1996, Yorkshire-Tyne Tees Television adopted a new branding package, based on the concept of Channel 3. The new look was fully implemented in the Tyne Tees region, where all on-screen branding was replaced by giant numeral &apos;3&apos;, and the Tyne Tees brand became secondary, however the look was only partially implemented in the Yorkshire region. The entirety of Yorkshire&apos;s Channel 3 look included an ident where the chevron span against a light blue background with numeral &apos;3&apos;s covering the background. Another ident featured the chevron with the &apos;3&apos; numeral embossed on the side, which the camera would then zoom into, before revealing a spinning numeral 3, which in turn had YTV chevron on the middle of the 3 and when zoomed into, the chevron re-appeared spinning against the background. The look also heralded the return of the On Ilkla Moor Baht &apos;at tune, which was now noticeably higher in pitch. [ ITV1 Yorkshire Idents 5 http://thetvroom.com/itv/itv-yorkshire-01-20.html TV Room 5 August 2011 ] The Channel 3 look was dropped in 1998, following Granada &apos;s acquisition of Yorkshire-Tyne Tees Television, with the look returning to a spinning chevron against a misty blue background, light blue during the day and dark blue in the evenings. In 1999, Yorkshire Television adopted the second generic look, based on the theme of hearts, which was used for the entirety of the branding period before network programming. However, for local programming, Yorkshire created their own ident featuring a background of spinning chevrons, with pictures of the region featuring inside a central box. In 2002, the brand was dropped in favour of a national ITV1 identity, in which local regional identities were dropped except before local programming, when the Yorkshire name appeared below the ITV1 logo only. These regional idents however were dropped by 2006. [ Former announcers ] Redvers Kyle (1968–1993) Bob Preedy (late 1980s - 2002) John Crosse (senior announcer, early 1970s - 1998) Graham Roberts (c. 1970s - 1993) Kerrie Gosney (2000–2002) Earl Richmond (1968 - c.1970s) Neil Didsbury (2001–2002) Pete Haslam (promo voiceover, 1999 - c.2007) Peter Lewis (late 1960s) Keith Martin Maggie Mash (1988–2002) Nick Oliver Karen Petch Paul Lally (c.1968 - 1990s) Ian De Stains (1968–1970) Paul Kaye (c.1970s - 1980) Helen Aitken (1995–2002) Roger Tilling (1998 - c.2000) Colin Weston (freelancer) Stephen Whitlock (1992–2004) [ Programming ] { Arla Foods site, Kirkstall Road, occasionally YTV filming location. } [ November 2011 ] Yorkshire Television was a major producer within the ITV network and produced programming in all genres. The presenter Alan Whicker became a shareholder in the company at its inception and made many programmes for the station, most notably interviews with the Cat&apos;s Eye inventor Percy Shaw and the Haiti dictator Baby Doc Duvalier. In drama the company had many critical successes including Hadleigh, The Main Chance, Flambards, Harry&apos;s Game, Heartbeat, The Darling Buds of May, A Touch of Frost, Coming Home, Shoot To Kill and The Beiderbecke Trilogy. In comedy, it produced many populist shows such as In Loving Memory, Duty Free, Rising Damp, Only When I Laugh, Joker&apos;s Wild, Oh No, It&apos;s Selwyn Froggitt!, Queenie&apos;s Castle, The New Statesman, Farrington of the F.O. and gave the comedian Les Dawson his first major series. For children, YTV contributed many networked shows including Animal Kwackers, The Riddlers, Junior Showtime, The Flaxton Boys, Follyfoot and My Parents Are Aliens as well as the long-running hit How We Used to Live for ITV&apos;s Schools and Colleges&apos; output. In entertainment, it produced a large number of networked quiz shows such as 3-2-1 and Winner Takes All and religion-oriented shows such as Stars on Sunday. { Emmerdale village built by YTV in 1997 for filming. } In 1969 it launched its first soap opera Castle Haven which was cancelled after one year. When the restrictions on daytime broadcasting were relaxed in 1972 it launched an afternoon drama called Emmerdale Farm, which is still being broadcast as Emmerdale. The company invested heavily in outside broadcast facilities and was a large contributor to ITV Sport, responsible primarily for covering northern-based horserace meetings (with London Weekend Television and Thames Television covering the south and ATV covering the Midlands ) amongst other sporting events. In the field of investigative journalism the station soon gained an international reputation for award-winning documentaries: 1975 saw the transmission of the BAFTA award-winning Johnny Go Home, a startling exposé of teenage male prostitution and homelessness in London. In the same year the station transmitted Too Long a Winter (also a BAFTA award-winner), featuring Yorkshire Daleswoman Hannah Hauxwell who lived an austere and harsh lifestyle whilst running her small farm. In 1979 the documentary Rampton: The Secret Hospital, making public the treatment of patients at the Nottinghamshire mental care facility Rampton Hospital, led to a Government investigation - it also won an international Emmy award for the station. The 1989 documentary Four Hours in My Lai (broadcast as part of the monthly First Tuesday strand) revealed new information about the 1968 massacre. Yorkshire Television also produced the 1989 documentary One Day in the Life of Television. { Goathland : filming location for } { Heartbeat. } YTV has often led the way in British commercial broadcasting. As well as building the first purpose-built colour studios on Europe it was the first to offer breakfast television. In 1977, the station took part in a nine-week trial offering viewers an extra hour of programming at breakfast time, beginning transmission at 8:30am with a 15-minute national and regional news bulletin called Good Morning Calendar alongside cartoons and episodes of Peyton Place. A similar experiment was carried out by Tyne Tees Television around the same time. In August 1986, the station was the first to offer 24-hour transmission (when both the BBC and ITV companies closed down at around 12:30 to 1am). This was achieved by simulcasting the satellite station Music Box - both YTV and Music Box were partly owned by the same company ( W H Smith ). The experiment ended shortly before Music Box closed down in January 1987 and was replaced by a teletext-based Jobfinder service which broadcast for one hour after closedown. YTV re-introduced 24-hour programming 18 months later along with the rest of the ITV network, beginning 24-hour broadcasting on 30 May 1988. In the mid-1980s, Yorkshire broke from the network by refusing to screen the BAFTA Awards, claiming them to be slaps on the backs of the BBC. The movie The Sting was a replacement in 1986. As the rest of the network over-ran in the live BAFTA screening, Yorkshire had to cobble together minor programmes until other regions were able to screen the late-running ITN News. In the 1990s, while Bruce Gyngell was managing director, Yorkshire declined to show The Good Sex Guide, replacing the programme with Alan Whicker repeats. [ Calendar ] Calendar is ITV Yorkshire&apos;s long-running news programme which is aired throughout the day on ITV Yorkshire. The main programme at 6pm was split into two regions from its inception until 18 February 2009. In the North/West, Duncan Wood and Christine Talbot presented the programme, while in the South/East, it was presented by John Shires and Gaynor Barnes. On 19 February 2009, Calendar became pan-regional and is presented by Duncan Wood and Christine Talbot. Gaynor Barnes is now the presenter for the Calendar News bulletins at 6.35am, 7.10am and 8.10am during GMTV on weekdays although she is still a stand-in presenter for Christine Talbot. Calendar first appeared on YTV&apos;s launch night, presented by Jonathan Aitken. In the past, Calendar has been hosted by the late Richard Whiteley (until 1995, alongside his duties on Countdown, earning him the nickname &quot; Twice Nightly Whiteley &quot; ), Austin Mitchell (until he became a Labour Member of Parliament in 1977) and Mike Morris. Calendar has reported a number of significant events during its history. The construction of major projects such as the M62 motorway (1968–1975) and the Humber Bridge (1972–1981) were covered by the programme. Also covered were major disasters including the failed attempt to rescue miners at Lofthouse Colliery, Wakefield (1973), the explosion at the chemical factory at Flixborough, Lincolnshire (1974), the Bradford City stadium fire (1985) (transmitted live by YTV who were covering the football match for ITV Sport ) and the Hillsborough disaster (1989). Two highly significant events in modern history occurred in the Calendar area; the murders committed by the Yorkshire Ripper (1975–1981) and the Miners&apos; Strike (1984–1985). More recently, the 6pm Calendar programme was one of the first in the UK to report the finding of child abuse victim Shannon Matthews alive near Dewsbury (2008). Originally broadcast from Studio 2 in YTV&apos;s main studios in Kirkstall Road, in 1987 the operation was moved to a former ice skating rink and bowling alley opposite the centre, which was converted into a dedicated news production facility and which is still in use today. The show has spawned a number of related shows including Calendar Kids (presented by Richard Madeley ), Calendar People (presented by Richard Whiteley), Calendar Election Special, Calendar Lunchtime Live and Calendar Countdown. [ Industrial relations ] From its inception YTV had a turbulent relationship with the broadcasting unions (a common theme within ITV). Many employees at the new company were recruited from the Manchester and Birmingham studios of the former ABC Weekend Television and the London station Rediffusion; the upheaval of enforced job changes on these employees combined with a relatively new management of a new ITV station and huge investment by shareholders provided fertile ground for the unions. In 1970 technicians broadcast a handwritten note that read &quot; &apos;Yorkshire Television have threatened to sack us, we are going on strike, good night &quot; before that evening&apos;s News at Ten. [ http://www.transdiffusion.org/emc/insidetv/history/union.php You can&apos;t touch me, I&apos;m part of the union Trasndiffusion.org ] YTV was forced off the air by more industrial action over the whole of Christmas, 1978. This partially coincided with a two-day national shutdown of both BBC channels by strikes in December of that year, meaning that for those two days the people of Yorkshire had no television at all. Many of ITV&apos;s Christmas programmes were eventually shown in the Yorkshire region in early 1979, after the dispute had ended. In the ITV strike of 1979 the station, like the rest of the network, was off the air for over two months (although appeals by the West Yorkshire Police in their search for the murderer known as the Yorkshire Ripper were periodically transmitted during the strike. [ http://www.yorkshirepost.co.uk/news/Yorkshire-TV-timeline-Highs-and.5039878.jp Yorkshire TV timeline: Highs and lows of 40 years on air Yorkshire Post 4 March 2009 ] However the dispute was more intense at YTV as the company&apos;s management were seen as instrumental in fighting the unions, especially the managing director Sir Paul Fox. In the 1980 franchise round several YTV staff submitted their own application for the Yorkshire franchise under the name of &apos;Television Yorkshire&apos;. [ The Franchise Affair Briggs Asa Spicer Joanna Asa Briggs, Baron Briggs Century 1986 0-7126-1201-7 ] [ December 2011 ] [ Criticisms ] { Calendar office on Charter Square roundabout in } { Sheffield. } [ November 2011 ] Although Yorkshire Television claims to serve the whole of Yorkshire and Lincolnshire, it has long been contended by many of the people of Sheffield that Yorkshire Television shows an unacceptable bias towards West Yorkshire in general and Leeds in particular. [ December 2009 ] Until 2006 there was a separate Calendar South region which consisted largely of the area covered by the Sheffield and Chesterfield transmitters, &quot; Calendar South &quot; opt out news bulletins were shown at the same time as the &quot; Calendar East &quot; opt out from the Belmont transmitter. This was a common criticism of many ITV franchisees as the bulk of production tended to be produced in one area, which was at the expense of other areas. Another example was Granada Television &apos;s heavy presence in Manchester who claimed there was a lack of investment in Liverpool and over-emphasis on Manchester. A similar charge of bias has been levied by viewers served by the Belmont Transmitter which covers Lincolnshire and northern Norfolk. Until 1 January 1974 this area received coverage from Anglia Television but was replaced by Yorkshire. It is often contended that the name of the company reflects its focus, but others say this is an unfair accusation given that during the 1970s and 1980s the company invested heavily in operations in Lincoln and Grimsby and created a regional opt-out for the area on its main news programme Calendar. This was succeeded by a news show dedicated to the region served by the Belmont transmitter, albeit still broadcast from the studios in Leeds unlike its BBC rival which is produced at studios in Hull. In 2009, the combined Belmont and Sheffield service was reverted to opt-outs within the main evening programme and a full late night bulletin on weekdays. [ References ] [ 2 ] [ External links ] [ Yorkshire Television ] [ yorkshire ITV Yorkshire ] Animated Yorkshire TV logo, 1968 from 625.uk.com (Requires Macromedia Flash version 4 or later). 1969 Yorkshire TV logo from 625.uk.com (Requires Macromedia Flash version 6 or later). 1969 Yorkshire TV in colour logo from 625.uk.com (Requires Macromedia Flash version 6 or later). 1982 revamp of the logo from 625.uk.com (Requires Macromedia Flash version 4 or later). Category:ITV franchisees Category:Television channels and stations established in 1968 Category:Media in Yorkshire Category:Peabody Award winners es:Yorkshire Television fr:Yorkshire Television simple:Yorkshire Television sv:Yorkshire Television