[ the Chilean police agency the bus manufacturer DINA S.A. ] Seal of DINA Dirección de Inteligencia Nacional ( [ National Intelligence Directorate ] ) or DINA was the Chile an secret police in the government of Augusto Pinochet. DINA was established in November 1973, as a Chilean Army intelligence unit headed by General Manuel Contreras and vice-director Raúl Iturriaga, who fled from justice in 2007. It was separated from the army and made an independent administrative unit in June 1974, under the aegis of decree #521. DINA existed until 1977, after which it was renamed the Central Nacional de Informaciones (CNI) (National Information Center). [ DINA internal suppression and human rights violations ] Under decree #521, the DINA had the power to detain any individual so long as there was a declared state of emergency. Such an administrative state characterized nearly the entire length of the Pinochet dictatorship. Torture and rape of detainees was common: [ Kornbluh Peter The Pinochet File : A Declassified Dossier on Atrocity and Accountability 2003 The New Press New York 1-56584-936-1 171 ] [ Foreign involvement ] The United States backed and supported the 1973 coup, and continued to aid the Pinochet dictatorship until it ended. Documents declassified from the CIA in September 2000 revealed that the head of DINA in 1975 was a &quot; paid CIA asset. &quot; The CIA actively supported the junta after the overthrow of Salvador Allende. The head of DINA, General Manuel Contreras, was made a paid asset despite continuing CIA reservations concerning the human rights abuses of the organization. Eventually the CIA became aware of DINA&apos;s &quot; possible &quot; involvement in the assassination of Orlando Letelier and Ronni Moffitt in Washington D.C., but they continued to maintain him as an asset. The CIA reports remain heavily excised. [ DINA foreign assassinations and operations ] [ Operation Condor Operation Colombo ] DINA was involved in Operation Condor, as well as Operation Colombo. In July 1976, two magazines in Argentina and Brazil published the names of 119 Chilean leftist opponents, claiming they had been killed in internal disputes unrelated to the Pinochet regime. Those two magazines would disappear after this one and only issue. Judge Juan Guzmán Tapia would eventually ask Chilean justices to lift Pinochet &apos;s immunity in this case, called &quot; Operation Colombo &quot;, having accumulated evidence that he had ordered the DINA to plant this disinformation, in order to cover up the &quot; disappearance &quot; and murder by the Chilean secret police of those 119 persons. On September 2005, Chile&apos;s Supreme Court would accept the lifting of Pinochet&apos;s immunity on this case. Judge Victor Montiglio, who took over the case after Juan Guzmán Tapia&apos;s retirement a few months before, has yet to name the doctors who would testify on Pinochet&apos;s health and ability to be interrogated. Victor Montiglio is known as a Pinochetist, and supports military auto-amnesty laws. He has already accorded amnesty to Manuel Contreras, who was given a prison sentence in 2004 in the Operation Colombo trial. [ Carlos Prats&apos; 1974 assassination and Orlando Letelier&apos;s 1976 assassination ] [ Letelier case ] DINA worked with international agents, such as Michael Townley, who assassinated former Chilean minister Orlando Letelier in Washington DC in 1976, as well as General Carlos Prats in Buenos Aires, Argentina, in 1974. According to a CIA document released in 2000, French OAS member Albert Spaggiari also acted as intermediary for the DINA in Europe, as well as Italian neo-fascist terrorist Stefano Delle Chiaie (alias ALFA). { CIA documents published by the } { National Security Archives, 2,1 2,5 2,6 (see 2,6 for Spaggiari and Delle Chiaie work for DINA } In a 1979 letter declassified in 2000, Michael Townley stated: &quot; There were meetings between him (Contreras), his Excellency (President Pinochet), and the Italians in Spain after Franco died. Also the Italians carried out numerous acts of military espionage against the Peruvians and Argentines not only in Europe, but also in Peru and Argentina &quot;. { Visit of Chilean President Pinochet to Spain During November 1975 with General Contreras, where they met with &quot; ALFA &quot;, an Italian terrorist, document declassified in 2000 by the CIA, published by the } { National Security Archive } Michael Townley described numerous meetings between Pinochet and Italian terrorists and spies as well as Pinochet&apos;s meetings with anti-Castro Cubans. Michael Townley worked with Eugenio Berríos on producing sarin gas in the 1970s, in a house DINA had in the district of Lo Curro, Santiago de Chile. [ El Mercurio Townley reveló uso de gas sarín antes de ser expulsado de Chile September 19, 2006 ] Eugenio Berríos, who was murdered in 1995, was also linked with drug traffickers and agents of DEA { El coronel que le pena al ejército, } { La Nación, September 24, 2005 } [ Colonia Dignidad ] [ Colonia Dignidad ] Investigations by Amnesty International and the Chilean National Commission for Truth and Reconciliation Report have verified that Colonia Dignidad, long held for a center used for rituals of ex-Nazi Paul Schäfer, was used by DINA as a concentration camp for the detention and torture of political prisoner s. Most accounts have this happening between 1973 and 1977 but precise dates are not known. Boris Weisfeiler, an American Jewish professor of Russian origin, is thought to have disappeared near Colonia Dignidad. The son of DINA head Manuel Contreras claims that his father and Pinochet visited Colonia Dignidad in 1974, and that his father and Schäfer were good friends. The current leader of Villa Baviera admits that torture took place within the old colony, but claims that Villa Baviera is a new entity. In March 2005, former DINA agent Michael Townley acknowledged links between Colonia Dignidad and DINA, as well as relations with the Bacteriological War Army Laboratory. He would have spoken about biological experiment s conducted on detainees, with the help of the laboratory and another one, that used to be situated on Via Naranja de lo Curro Street. According to Townley, former Christian Democrat President Eduardo Frei Montalva was assassinated by a poison made at Colonia Dignidad. { Michael Townley fue interrogado por muerte de Frei Montalva, } { Radio Cooperativa, March 30, 2005 } [ Others ] On an undated letter to Augusto Pinochet, CIA and DINA agent Michael Townley advised him that Virgilio Paz Romero, an anti-Castro Cuban, was taking photographs of British prisons in Northern Ireland in 1975 as a DINA assignment. The photographs were to be used by the Chilean government at the United Nations in New York to discredit the United Kingdom and accuse them of human rights violations. But they arrived too late to be used, and were finally published in El Mercurio. { Activities of Virgilio Paz in Northern Ireland during 1975, National Security Archive } [ See also ] Operation Condor Eugenio Berríos Manuel Contreras Raúl Iturriaga [ References ] [ External links ] History of the organization Memoriaviva (Complete list of Victims, Torture Centres and Criminals) Category:1970s in Chile Category:Anti-communist organizations Category:Defunct intelligence agencies Category:Human rights abuses Category:Operation Condor Category:Political repression Category:Secret police ar:مديرية الاستخبارات الوطنية ca:DINA da:DINA de:Dirección Nacional de Inteligencia es:Dirección de Inteligencia Nacional eo:DINA fr:Direction nationale du renseignement it:DINA nl:DINA pl:Dirección de Inteligencia Nacional pt:DINA (Chile) ru:Управление национальной разведки sr:ДИНА fi:DINA sv:Dirección de Inteligencia Nacional