Officially, the politics of Sudan takes place in the framework of a presidential representative democratic consociationalist republic, where the President of Sudan is Head of State, Head of Government and Commander-in-Chief of the Sudanese Armed Forces in a multi-party system. Legislative power is vested in both the government and in the two chambers, the National Assembly (lower) and the Council of States (upper), of the bicameral National Legislature. The judiciary is independent and obtained by the Constitutional Court. { https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/su.html } However, following a deadly civil war and the ongoing genocide in Darfur, Sudan is widely recognized as an authoritarian state where all effective political power is obtained by President Omar al-Bashir and the ruling National Congress Party (NCO). The political system of the Republic of Sudan was restructured following a military coup on 30 June 1989, when Omar al-Bashir, then a colonel in the Sudanese Army, led a group of officers and ousted the government of Prime Minister Sadiq al-Mahdi. Under al-Bashir&apos;s leadership, the new military government suspended political parties and introduced an Islamic legal code on the national level. [ Bekele Yilma Chickens are coming home to roost! http://www.ethiopianreview.com/content/2929 Ethiopian Review 2008-07-12 2008-07-15 ] He then became Chairman of the Revolutionary Command Council for National Salvation (a newly established body with legislative and executive powers for what was described as a transitional period), and assumed the posts of chief of state, prime minister, chief of the armed forces, and minister of defense. [ Cowell Alan Military Coup In Sudan Ousts Civilian Regime http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res%3D950DE4DA103DF932A35754C0A96F948260 The New York Times 1989-07-01 2008-07-15 ] Further on, after institutionalizing Sharia law in the northern part of the country along with Hassan al-Turabi, al-Bashir issued purges and executions in the upper ranks of the army, the banning of associations, political parties, and independent newspapers and the imprisonment of leading political figures and journalists. { Kepel, Jihad (2002), p.181 } In 1993, Sudan transformed into an Islamic totalitarian single-party state as al-Bashir abolished the Revolutionary Command Council and created the National Islamic Front (NIF) with a new parliament and government obtained solely by members of the NIF, and proclaimed himself President of Sudan. As a result, the Second Sudanese Civil War with the Sudan People&apos;s Liberation Army (SPLA) would only escalate in the following years. { Wasil Ali, &quot; Sudanese Islamist opposition leader denies link with Darfur rebels &quot;, Sudan Tribune, 13 May 2008. } { Profile: Sudan&apos;s President Bashir } From 1983 to 1997, the country was divided into five regions in the north and three in the south, each headed by a military governor. After a military coup in 1989, regional assemblies were suspended. With the Revolutionary Command Council for National Salvation abolished in 1993 and the ruling National Islamic Front (NIF) forming the National Congress Party (NCP), the new party included some non-Muslim members; mainly Southern Sudanese politicians, some of whom were appointed as ministers or state governors. In 1997, the structure of regional administration was replaced by the creation of twenty-six states. The executives, cabinets, and senior-level state officials are appointed by the President, and their limited budgets are determined by and dispensed from Khartoum. The states, as a result, remain economically dependent upon the central government. Khartoum state, comprising the capital and outlying districts, is administered by a governor. Following the signing of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) in 2005 between the government of Omar al-Bashir and the SPLA, a Government of National Unity was installed in Sudan in accordance with the Interim Constitution whereby a co- Vice President position representing the south was created in addition to the northern Sudanese Vice President. This allowed the north and south to split oil deposits equally, [ http://www.mohammadmufti.com/2011/01/some-reflection-on-upcoming-division-of.html Some Reflection on Upcoming Division of Sudan Mohammad Mufti 2011-01-17 2011-01-19 ] but also left both the north&apos;s and south&apos;s armies in place. Following the Darfur Peace Agreement, the office of senior Presidential advisor was allocated to Minni Minnawi, a Zaghawa of the Sudanese Liberation Army (SLA), and this thus became the fourth highest constitutional post. Executive posts are divided between the National Congress Party (NCP), the Sudan People&apos;s Liberation Army, Eastern Front and factions of the Umma Party and Democratic Unionist Party (DUP). This peace agreement with the rebel group Sudan People&apos;s Liberation Army (SPLA) granted Southern Sudan autonomy for six years, to be followed by a referendum about independence in 2011. According to the new 2005 constitution, the bicameral National Legislature is the official Sudanese parliament, and is divided between two chambers; the National Assembly, a lower house with 450 seats, and the Council of States, an upper house with 50 seats. Thus the parliament consists of 500 appointed members altogether, where all are indirectly elected by state legislatures to serve six-year terms. Despite his international arrest warrant, Omar al-Bashir was re-elected in the 2010 Sudanese presidential election, the first democratic election with multiple political parties participating in nine years. { SudanTribune article : SPLM Kiir to run for president in Sudan 2009 elections } { SudanTribune article : Eastern Sudan Beja, SPLM discuss electoral alliance } His political rival was Vice President Salva Kiir Mayardit, current leader of the SPLA. { http://www.sudantribune.com/spip.php?article28034 } &lt; ref &gt; “SPLM Kiir to run for president in Sudan 2009 elections” Sudan Tribune. 27 July 2008. &lt; http://home.kpn.nl/ende0098/Articles/20080726a.html &lt; /ref &gt; [ History ] From 1983 to 1997, the Sudan was divided into five regions in the north and three in the south, each headed by a military governor. After the 1985 coup, regional assemblies were suspended. The RCC was abolished in 1996, and the ruling National Islamic Front changed its name to the National Congress Party. The executives, cabinets, and senior-level state officials are appointed by the president and their limited budgets are determined by and dispensed from Khartoum. The states, as a result, remain economically dependent upon the central government. Khartoum state, comprising the capital and outlying districts, is administered by a governor. In December 1999, a power struggle climaxed between president Omar al-Bashir and NIF founder, Islamist ideologue, and then speaker of parliament Hassan al-Turabi. Al-Turabi was stripped of his posts in the ruling party and the government, parliament was disbanded, the constitution was suspended, and a state of national emergency was declared by presidential decree. Parliament resumed in February 2001 after the December 2000 presidential and parliamentary elections, but the national emergency laws remain in effect. Around the same time the Black Book, a manuscript by dissident Westerners detailing the domination of the northern peoples, was published. Al-Turabi was arrested in February 2001, and charged with being a threat to national security and the constitutional order for signing a memorandum of understanding with the Sudan People&apos;s Liberation Army. He was placed in a maximum-security prison and was freed in 2005. As part of the agreement ending the Second Sudanese Civil War, nine members of the SPLA and 16 members of the government were sworn in as Ministers on 22 September 2005, forming the first post war government of national unity. The inauguration was delayed over arguments over who would get various portfolios and as a result of the death of vice president John Garang. The National Congress Party kept control of the key energy, defense, interior and finance posts, while an SPLM appointee became foreign minister. Vice President Salva Kiir was reported to have backed down in the argument over who would have control of the vital Ministry of Energy and Mining, which handles the output of Sudan&apos;s oil fields. [ Executive branch ] |President | Omar Hasan Ahmad al-Bashir (عمر حسن أحمد البشير) | National Congress |October 16, 1993|-|First Vice President| Salva Kiir Mayardit | SPLM |August 11, 2005|-|Second Vice President | Ali Osman Taha | National Congress |July 2005|}President al-Bashir&apos;s government is dominated by members of Sudan&apos;s National Islamic Front (NIF), a fundamentalist political organization formed from the Muslim Brotherhood in 1986; in 1998, the NIF created the National Congress as its legal front; the National Congress/NIF dominates much of Khartoum&apos;s overall domestic and foreign policies; President al-Bashir named a new cabinet on April 20, 1996 which includes members of the National Islamic Front, serving and retired military officers, and civilian technocrats; on March 8, 1998, he reshuffled the cabinet and brought in several former rebel and opposition members as ministers; he reshuffled his cabinet again on January 24, 2000 but announced few changes. A government of national unity was sworn in on 22 September, with 16 members from the National Congress, nine from the SPLM and two from the northern opposition National Democratic Alliance, which left the seats vacant in protest over how the posts were allocated. The Darfur rebels were not represented.Al-Bashir, as chairman of the Revolutionary Command Council for National Salvation (RCC), assumed power on June 30, 1989 and served concurrently as chief of state, chairman of the RCC, prime minister, and minister of defense until 16 October 1993 when he was appointed president by the RCC; upon its dissolution on 16 October 1993, the RCC&apos;s executive and legislative powers were devolved to the president and the Transitional National Assembly (TNA), Sudan&apos;s appointed legislative body, which has since been replaced by the National Assembly elected in March 1996; on December 12, 1999 Bashir dismissed the National Assembly during an internal power struggle between the president and speaker of the Parliament Hasan al-Turabi [ Legislative branch ] The country is currently in an interim (transitional) period following the signing of a Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) on 9 January 2005 that officially ended the civil war between the Sudanese Government (based in Khartoum ) and the southern-based Sudan People&apos;s Liberation Movement (SPLM) rebel group. The newly formed National Legislature, whose members were chosen in mid-2005, has two chambers. The National Assembly (Majlis Watani) consists of 450 appointed members who represent the government, former rebels, and other opposition political parties. The Council of States (Majlis Welayat) has 50 members who are indirectly elected by state legislatures. All members of the National Legislature serve six-year terms. [ Political parties and elections ] [ List of political parties in Sudan Elections in Sudan ] The elected parliament is replaced by an appointed parliament. [ Judicial branch ] Supreme Court; Special Revolutionary Courts [ Legal system ] The legal system is based on Islamic law; as of January 20, 1991, the now defunct Revolutionary Command Council imposed Islamic law in the northern states; Islamic law applies to all residents of the northern states regardless of their religion; some separate religious courts; accepts compulsory International Court of Justice jurisdiction, with reservations. [ Administrative divisions ] Sudan is divided in twenty-six states each governed by a governor and council of ministers, each member of each state of council of ministers is appointed by the president of the country. the elections of governors is different from others, the president picks three people who he decides will be running against each other the one who wins at least 50% popular vote is the governor of that state if no one wins at least 50% popular vote, the person with the least amount of vote is discualified from the campaign, and they redo the election and then someone has to have at least 50% popular vote. the following are the states of Sudan. (wilayat, singular wilayah): A&apos;ali an Nil, Al Bahr al Ahmar, Al Buhayrat, Al Jazirah, Al Khartum, Al Qadarif, Al Wahdah, An Nil al Abyad, An Nil al Azraq, Ash Shamaliyah, Bahr al Jabal, Gharb al Istiwa&apos;iyah, Gharb Bahr al Ghazal, Gharb Darfur, Gharb Kurdufan, Janub Darfur, Janub Kurdufan, Junqali, Kassala, Nahr an Nil, Shamal Bahr al Ghazal, Shamal Darfur, Shamal Kurdufan, Sharq al Istiwa&apos;iyah, Sinnar, Warab. [ International organization participation ] Sudan is member of ABEDA, ACP, AfDB, AFESD, AL, AMF, CAEU, CCC, ECA, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IGAD, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO (correspondent), ITU, NAM, OAU, OIC, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNU, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO (observer) [ References ] [ External links ] [ Regional/Africa/Sudan/Government Sudan Government ] bg:Държавно устройство на Судан es:Política de Sudán fr:Politique du Soudan pt:Política do Sudão yo:Ìṣèlú ilẹ̀ Sudan zh:蘇丹政治