[ correct CAS ] { 232-679-6 } { GM5090000 } [ changed chemspider ] { NA } [ variable variable white powder 1.5 g/cm 3 none decomp. ] [ ICSC 1553 not listed 410  °C ] { amylose molecule } { amylopectin molecule } Granules of wheat starch, stained with iodine, photographed through a light microscope Starch or amylum is a carbohydrate consisting of a large number of glucose units joined by glycosidic bond s. This polysaccharide is produced by all green plant s as an energy store. It is the most common carbohydrate in the human diet and is contained in large amounts in such staple food s as potato es, wheat, maize (corn), rice, and cassava. Pure starch is a white, tasteless and odorless powder that is insoluble in cold water or alcohol. It consists of two types of molecules: the linear and helical amylose and the branched amylopectin.Depending on the plant, starch generally contains 20 to 25% amylose and 75 to 80% amylopectin by weight. [ Brown W. H. Poon T. 2005 Introduction to organic chemistry 3rd Wiley 0-471-44451-0 ] [ March 2012 ] Glycogen, the glucose store of animals, is a more branched version of amylopectin. Starch is processed to produce many of the sugars in processed foods. Dissolving starch in warm water gives wheatpaste, which can be used as a thickening, stiffening or gluing agent. The biggest industrial non-food use of starch is as adhesive in the papermaking process. [ Name ] The word &quot; starch &quot; is derived from Middle English sterchen, meaning to stiffen. &quot; amylum &quot; is Latin for starch, from the Greek αμυλον, &quot; amylon &quot; which means &quot; not ground at a mill &quot;. The root amyl is used in biochemistry for several compounds related to starch. [ History ] Starch grains from the rhizome s of Typha (cattails, bullrushes) as flour have been identified from grinding stone s in Europe dating back to 30,000 years ago. [ 10.1073/pnas.1006993107 Thirty thousand-year-old evidence of plant food processing 2010 Revedin A. Aranguren B. Becattini R. Longo L. Marconi E. Lippi M. M. Skakun N. Sinitsyn A. Spiridonova E. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107 44 20956317 18815–9 2973873 ] Pure extracted wheat starch paste was used in Ancient Egypt possibly to glue papyrus. { Pliny the Elder, The } { Natural History (Pliny), Book XIII, Chapter 26, The paste used in preparation of paper } The extraction of starch is first described in the Natural History of Pliny the Elder around AD 77-79. { Pliny the Elder, The } { Natural History (Pliny), Book XIII, Chapter 17, } Romans used it also in cosmetic creams, to powder the hair and to thicken sauces. Persians and Indians used it to make dishes similar to gothumai wheat halva. Rice starch as surface treatment of paper has been used in paper production in China, from 700 AD onwards. [ Dard Hunter 1947 Papermaking DoverPublications 978-0-486-23619-3 194 ] In addition to starchy plants consumed directly, 66 million tonnes of starch were being produced per year world-wide by 2008. In the EU this was around 8.5 million tonnes, with around40% being used for industrial applications and 60% for food uses, most of the latter as glucose syrup s. { International Starch Institute Denmark, Starch production volume } [ Energy store of plants ] [ March 2012 ] In photosynthesis, plants use light energy to produce glucose from carbon dioxide. The glucose is stored mainly in the form of starch granules, in plastid s such as chloroplast s and especially amyloplast s. Toward the end of the growing season, starch accumulates in twigs of trees near the buds. Fruit, seed s, rhizome s, and tuber s store starch to prepare for the next growing season. Glucose is soluble in water, hydrophilic, binds much water and then takes up much space; glucose in the form of starch, on the other hand, is not soluble and can be stored much more compactly. Glucose molecules are bound in starch by the easily hydrolyzed alpha bonds. The same type of bond is found in the animal reserve polysaccharide glycogen. This is in contrast to many structural polysaccharides such as chitin, cellulose and peptidoglycan, which are bound by beta bonds and are much more resistant to hydrolysis. [ Biosynthesis ] Plants produce starch by first converting glucose 1-phosphate to ADP -glucose using the enzyme glucose-1-phosphate adenylyltransferase. This step requires energy in the form of ATP. The enzyme starch synthase then adds the ADP-glucose via a 1,4-alpha glycosidic bond to a growing chain of glucose residues, liberating ADP and creating amylose. Starch branching enzyme introduces 1,6-alpha glycosidic bonds between these chains, creating the branched amylopectin. The starch debranching enzyme isoamylase removes some of these branches. Several isoform s of these enzymes exist, leading to a highly complex synthesis process. [ 10.1021/bm000133c The Biosynthesis of Starch Granules 2001 Smith Alison M. Biomacromolecules 2 2 335–41 11749190 ] Glycogen and amylopectin have the same structure, but the former has about one branch point per ten 1,4-alpha bonds, compared to about one branch point per thirty 1,4-alpha bonds in amylopectin. [ Stryer, Lubert; Berg, Jeremy Mark; Tymoczko, John L. Biochemistry W.H. Freeman San Francisco 2002 0-7167-3051-0 5th http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/bv.fcgi?rid%3Dstryer Section 11.2.2 http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/bv.fcgi?rid%3Dstryer.section.1517#1522 ] Amylopectin is synthesized from ADP-glucose while mammals and fungi synthesize glycogen from UDP-glucose; for most cases, bacteria synthesize glycogen from ADP-glucose (analogous to starch). [ Ball Steven G. Matthew K Morell FROM BACTERIAL GLYCOGEN TO STARCH: Understanding the Biogenesis of the Plant Starch Granule Annual Review of Plant Biology 2003 54 1 207-233 10.1146/annurev.arplant.54.031902.134927 http://www.annualreviews.org/doi/abs/10.1146/annurev.arplant.54.031902.134927 ] [ Properties ] [ Structure ] [ March 2012 ] While amylose was traditionally thought to be completely unbranched, it is now known that some of its molecules contain a few branch points. { David R. Lineback, &quot; Starch &quot;, in AccessScience@McGraw-Hill. } Although in absolute mass only about one quarter of the starch granules in plants consist of amylose, there are about 150 times more amylose molecules than amylopectin molecules. Amylose is a much smaller molecule than amylopectin. Starch molecules arrange themselves in the plant in semi-crystalline granules. Each plant species has a unique starch granular size: rice starch is relatively small (about 2μm) while potato starch es have larger granules (up to 100μm). Starch becomes soluble in water when heated. The granules swell and burst, the semi-crystalline structure is lost and the smaller amylose molecules start leaching out of the granule, forming a network that holds water and increasing the mixture&apos;s viscosity. This process is called starch gelatinization. During cooking the starch becomes a paste and increases further in viscosity. During cooling or prolonged storage of the paste, the semi-crystalline structure partially recovers and the starch paste thickens, expelling water. This is mainly caused by retrogradation of the amylose. This process is responsible for the hardening of bread or staling, and for the water layer on top of a starch gel ( syneresis ). Some cultivated plant varieties have pure amylopectin starch without amylose, known as waxy starches. The most used is waxy maize, others are glutinous rice and waxy potato starch. Waxy starches have less retrogradation, resulting in a more stable paste. High amylose starch, amylomaize, is cultivated for the use of its gel strength and for use as a resistant starch (a starch that resists digestion) in food products. [ Hydrolysis ] The enzyme s that break down or hydrolyze starch into the constituent sugars are known as amylase s. Alpha-amylases are found in plants and in animals. Human saliva is rich in amylase, and the pancreas also secretes the enzyme. Individuals from populations with a high-starch diet tend to have more amylase genes than those with low-starch diets; [ 10.1038/ng2123 Diet and the evolution of human amylase gene copy number variation 2007 Perry George H Dominy Nathaniel J Claw Katrina G Lee Arthur S Fiegler Heike Redon Richard Werner John Villanea Fernando A Mountain Joanna L Nature Genetics 39 10 1256–60 17828263 2377015 ] chimpanzee s have very few amylase genes. It is possible that turning to a high-starch diet was a significant event in human evolution. [ P.Z. Myers http://scienceblogs.com/pharyngula/2008/12/amylase_and_human_evolution.php Amylase and human evolution December 11, 2008 ] [ March 2012 ] Beta-amylase cuts starch into maltose units. This process is important in the digestion of starch and is also used in brewing, where amylase from the skin of seed grains is responsible for converting starch to maltose ( Malting, Mashing ). [ March 2012 ] [ Dextrinization ] If starch is subjected to dry heat, it breaks down to form dextrin s, also called &quot; pyrodextrins &quot; in this context. This break down process is known as dextrinization. (Pyro)dextrins are mainly yellow to brown in color and dextrinization is partially responsible for the browning of toasted bread. [ March 2012 ] [ Chemical tests ] [ Iodine test ] Iodine solution is used to test for starch; a dark blue color indicates the presence of starch. The details of this reaction are not yet fully known, but it is thought that the iodine (I 3 − and I 5 − ions) fit inside the coils of amylose, the charge transfers between the iodine and the starch, and the energy level spacings in the resulting complex correspond to the absorption spectrum in the visible light region. The strength of the resulting blue color depends on the amount of amylose present. Waxy starches with little or no amylose present will color red. Starch, 800x magnified, under polarized light Starch indicator solution consisting of water, starch and iodine is often used in redox titrations: in the presence of an oxidizing agent the solution turns blue, in the presence of reducing agent the blue color disappears because triiodide (I 3 − ) ions break up into three iodide ions, disassembling the starch-iodine complex.A 0.3% w/w solution is the standard concentration for a starch indicator. It is made by adding 3  grams of soluble starch to 1 liter of heated water; the solution is cooled before use (starch-iodine complex becomes unstable at temperatures above 35  °C). Each species of plant has a unique type of starch granules in granular size, shape and crystallization pattern. Under the microscope, starch grains stained with iodine illuminated from behind with polarized light show a distinctive Maltese cross effect (also known as extinction cross and birefringence ). [ Food ] Starch is the most common carbohydrate in the human diet and is contained in many staple food s. The major sources of starch intake worldwide are the cereals ( rice, wheat, and maize ) and the root vegetable s ( potato es and cassava ). { Anne-Charlotte Eliasson (2004). Starch in food: Structure, function and applications. Woodhead Publishing. ISBN 978-0-8493-2555-7. } Many other starchy foods are grown, some only in specific climates, including acorn s, arrowroot, arracacha, banana s, barley, breadfruit, buckwheat, canna, colacasia, katakuri, kudzu, malanga, millet, oat s, oca, polynesian arrowroot, sago, sorghum, sweet potato es, rye, taro, chestnut s, water chestnut s and yams, and many kinds of bean s, such as favas, lentils, mung bean s, peas, and chickpea s. Widely used prepared foods containing starch are bread, pancake s, cereals, noodles, pasta, porridge and tortilla. Digestive enzymes have problems digesting crystalline structures. Raw starch will digest poorly in the duodenum and small intestine, while bacterial degradation will take place mainly in the colon. When starch is cooked, the digestibility is increased. Hence, before humans started using fire, eating grains was not a very useful way to get energy. Starch gelatinization during cake baking can be impaired by sugar competing for water, preventing gelatinization and improving texture. [ Starch industry ] The starch industry extracts and refines starches from seeds, roots and tubers, by wet grinding, washing, sieving and drying. Today, the main commercial refined starches are cornstarch, tapioca, wheat and potato starch. To a lesser extent, sources include rice, sweet potato, sago and mung bean. Historically, Florida arrowroot was also commercialized. To this day, starch is extracted from more than 50 types of plants. Untreated starch requires heat to thicken or gelatinize. When a starch is pre-cooked, it can then be used to thicken instantly in cold water. This is referred to as a pregelatinized starch. [ Starch sugars ] Starch can be hydrolyzed into simpler carbohydrates by acid s, various enzyme s, or a combination of the two. The resulting fragments are known as dextrin s. The extent of conversion is typically quantified by dextrose equivalent (DE), which is roughly the fraction of the glycosidic bond s in starch that have been broken. These starch sugars are by far the most common starch based food ingredient and are used as sweetener in many drinks and foods. They include: [ http://www.elmhurst.edu/~chm/vchembook/549sweet.html Sweetners - Introduction Elmhurst College Ophardt, Charles ] [ http://www.foodproductdesign.com/articles/2008/12/hfcs-how-sweet-it-is.aspx HFCS: How Sweet It Is December 2, 2008 John S. White ] Maltodextrin, a lightly hydrolyzed (DE 10 –20) starch product used as a bland-tasting filler and thickener. Various glucose syrup s (DE 30 –70), also called corn syrup s in the US, viscous solutions used as sweeteners and thickeners in many kinds of processed foods. Dextrose (DE 100), commercial glucose, prepared by the complete hydrolysis of starch. High fructose syrup, made by treating dextrose solutions with the enzyme glucose isomerase, until a substantial fraction of the glucose has been converted to fructose. In the United States, high fructose corn syrup is the principal sweetener used in sweetened beverages because fructose has better handling characteristics, such as microbiological stability, and more consistent sweetness/flavor. One kind of high fructose corn syrup, HFCS-55, is typically sweeter than regular sucrose because it is made with more fructose, while the sweetness of HFCS-42 is on par with sucrose. Sugar alcohol s, such as maltitol, erythritol, sorbitol, mannitol and hydrogenated starch hydrolysate, are sweeteners made by reducing sugars. [ Modified starches ] A modified starch is a starch that has been chemically modified to allow the starch to function properly under conditions frequently encountered during processing or storage, such as high heat, high shear, low pH, freeze/thaw and cooling. The modified food starches are E coded according to the International Numbering System for Food Additives (INS): { Modified Starches. CODEX ALIMENTARIUS published in FNP 52 Add 9 (2001) } 1400 Dextrin 1401 Acid-treated starch 1402 Alkaline-treated starch 1403 Bleached starch 1404 Oxidized starch 1405 Starches, enzyme-treated 1410 Monostarch phosphate 1412 Distarch phosphate 1413 Phosphated distarch phosphate 1414 Acetylated distarch phosphate 1420 Starch acetate 1422 Acetylated distarch adipate 1440 Hydroxypropyl starch 1442 Hydroxypropyl distarch phosphate 1443 Hydroxypropyl distarch glycerol 1450 Starch sodium octenyl succinate 1451 Acetylated oxidized starch INS 1401, 1402, 1403 and 1405 are in the EU food ingredients without an E-number. Typical modified starches for technical applications are cationic starch es, hydroxyethyl starch and carboxymethylated starches. [ Use as food additive ] As an additive for food processing, food starches are typically used as thickeners and stabilizers in foods such as puddings, custards, soups, sauces, gravies, pie fillings, and salad dressings, and to make noodles and pastas. Gummed sweets such as jelly beans and wine gums are not manufactured using a mold in the conventional sense. A tray is filled with native starch and leveled. A positive mold is then pressed into the starch leaving an impression of 1000 or so jelly beans. The jelly mix is then poured into the impressions and put into a stove to set. This method greatly reduces the number of molds that must be manufactured. Resistant starch is starch that escapes digestion in the small intestine of healthy individuals. High amylose starch from corn has a higher gelatinization temperature than other types of starch and retains its resistant starch content through baking, mild extrusion and other food processing techniques. It is used as an insoluble dietary fiber in processed foods such as bread, pasta, cookies, crackers, pretzels and other low moisture foods. It is also utilized as a dietary supplement for its health benefits. Published studies have shown that Type 2 resistant corn helps to improve insulin sensitivity, [ 10.3945/jn.111.152975 Resistant Starch from High-Amylose Maize Increases Insulin Sensitivity in Overweight and Obese Men 2012 Maki K. C. Pelkman C. L. Finocchiaro E. T. Kelley K. M. Lawless A. L. Schild A. L. Rains T. M. Journal of Nutrition 22357745 142 4 717–23 ] increases satiety [ 10.1017/S0007114509992534 Acute ingestion of resistant starch reduces food intake in healthy adults 2009 Bodinham Caroline L. Frost Gary S. Robertson M. Denise British Journal of Nutrition 103 6 19857367 917–22 ] and improves markers of colonic function. [ 10.1111/j.1467-3010.2005.00481.x Health properties of resistant starch 2005 Nugent A. P. Nutrition Bulletin 30 27–54 ] It has been suggested that resistant starch contributes to the health benefits of intact whole grains. [ 10.1155/2012/829238 Whole Grains, Legumes, and the Subsequent Meal Effect: Implications for Blood Glucose Control and the Role of Fermentation 2012 Higgins Janine A. Journal of Nutrition and Metabolism 2012 22132324 1 3205742 ] In the pharmaceutical industry, starch is also used as an excipient, as tablet disintegrant or as binder. [ Industrial applications ] Starch adhesive [ Papermaking ] Papermaking is the largest non-food application for starches globally, consuming millions of metric tons annually. { NNFCC Renewable Chemicals Factsheet: Starch } In a typical sheet of copy paper for instance, the starch content may be as high as 8%. Both chemically modified and unmodified starches are used in papermaking. In the wet part of the papermaking process, generally called the “wet-end”, the starches used are cationic and have a positive charge bound to the starch polymer. These starch derivatives associate with the anionic or negatively charged paper fibers / cellulose and inorganic fillers. Cationic starches together with other retention and internal sizing agent help to give the necessary strength properties to the paper web to be formed in the papermaking process ( wet strength ), and to provide strength to the final paper sheet (dry strength). In the dry end of the papermaking process, the paper web is rewetted with a starch based solution. The process is called surface sizing. Starches used have been chemically, or enzymatically depolymerized at the paper mill or by the starch industry (oxidized starch). The size - starch solutions are applied to the paper web by means of various mechanical presses (size press). Together with surface sizing agent the surface starches impart additional strength to the paper web and additionally provide water hold out or &quot; size &quot; for superior printing properties. Starch is also used in paper coating as one of the binders for the coating formulation a mixture of pigments, binders and thickeners. Coated paper has improved smoothness, hardness, whiteness and gloss and thus improves printing characteristics. [ Corrugated board adhesives ] Corrugated board adhesives are the next largest application of non-food starches globally. Starch glue s are mostly based on unmodified native starches, plus some additive such as borax and caustic soda. Part of the starch is gelatinized to carry the slurry of uncooked starches and prevent sedimentation. This opaque glue is called a SteinHall adhesive. The glue is applied on tips of the fluting. The fluted paper is pressed to paper called liner. This is then dried under high heat, which causes the rest of the uncooked starch in glue to swell/gelatinize. This gelatinizing makes the glue a fast and strong adhesive for corrugated board production. [ Clothing starch ] Clothing or laundry starch is a liquid that is prepared by mixing a vegetable starch in water (earlier preparations also had to be boiled), and is used in the laundering of clothes. Starch was widely used in Europe in the 16th and 17th centuries to stiffen the wide collars and ruffs of fine linen which surrounded the necks of the well-to-do. During the 19th century and early 20th century, it was stylish to stiffen the collars and sleeves of men&apos;s shirt s and the ruffles of girls&apos; petticoat s by applying starch to them as the clean clothes were being ironed. Aside from the smooth, crisp edges it gave to clothing, it served practical purposes as well. Dirt and sweat from a person&apos;s neck and wrists would stick to the starch rather than to the fibers of the clothing, and would easily wash away along with the starch. After each laundering, the starch would be reapplied. Today, the product is sold in aerosol cans for home use. [ Other ] Another large non-food starch application is in the construction industry, where starch is used in the gypsum wall board manufacturing process. Chemically modified or unmodified starches are added to the stucco containing primarily gypsum. Top and bottom heavyweight sheets of paper are applied to the formulation, and the process is allowed to heat and cure to form the eventual rigid wall board. The starches act as a glue for the cured gypsum rock with the paper covering, and also provide rigidity to the board. Starch is used in the manufacture of various adhesives or glues [ http://www.ars.usda.gov/is/ar/archive/apr00/wood0400.htm Stuck on Starch: A new wood adhesive US Department of Agriculture 2000 ] for book-binding, wallpaper adhesive s, paper sack production, tube winding, gummed paper, envelope adhesives, school glues and bottle labeling. Starch derivatives, such as yellow dextrins, can be modified by addition of some chemicals to form a hard glue for paper work; some of those forms use borax or soda ash, which are mixed with the starch solution at 50–70  °C to create a very good adhesive. Sodium silicate can be added to reinforce these formulae. [ http://www.russell-webb.com/anti_set_off_powder/soluble_anti-set-off-powder.html Spray Powder Russell-Webb 2007-07-05 http://web.archive.org/web/20070809214841/http%3A//www.russell-webb.com/anti_set_off_powder/soluble_anti-set-off-powder.html 2007-08-09 ] [ 10.1371/journal.pone.0000456 High-Yield Hydrogen Production from Starch and Water by a Synthetic Enzymatic Pathway 2007 Melis Anastasios Zhang Y.-H. Percival Evans Barbara R. Mielenz Jonathan R. Hopkins Robert C. Adams Michael W.W. PLoS ONE 2 5 e456 17520015 1866174 ] Starch is also used to make some packing peanut s, and some drop ceiling tiles. Textile chemicals from starch are used to reduce breaking of yarn s during weaving; the warp yarns are sized. Starch is mainly used to size cotton based yarns. Modified starch is also used as textile printing thickener. In the printing industry, food grade starch is used in the manufacture of anti-set-off spray powder used to separate printed sheets of paper to avoid wet ink being set off. Starch is used to produce various bioplastic s, synthetic polymers that are biodegradable. An example is polylactic acid. For body powder, powdered corn starch is used as a substitute for talcum powder, and similarly in other health and beauty products. In oil exploration, starch is used to adjust the viscosity of drilling fluid, which is used to lubricate the drill head and suspend the grinding residue in petroleum extraction. Glucose from starch can be further fermented to biofuel corn ethanol using the so called wet milling process. Today most bioethanol production plants use the dry milling process to ferment corn or other feedstock directly to ethanol. American coalition for ethanol, Ethanol facilities Hydrogen production can use starch as the raw material, using enzymes. [ See also ] Acrylamide, present in fried potatoes Baking, making starches digestible Cooking Distilled beverage, brewing from starch alcohol Flour Modified starch Non-Newtonian fluid Starch indicator Yeast extract [ References ] [ External links ] [ starch ] Starch, by Martin Chaplin Starch - Stärke, scientific journal on starch { Category:Starch } Category:Nutrition Category:Edible thickening agents Category:Staple foods Category:Excipients Category:Printing als:Stärke ar:نشا an:Amelón az:Nişasta be:Крухмал be-x-old:Крухмал bg:Нишесте bs:Škrob ca:Midó cs:Škrob da:Kulhydrat#Stivelse de:Stärke et:Tärklis el:Άμυλο es:Almidón eo:Amelo eu:Almidoi fa:نشاسته fr:Amidon fy:Stiselmoal gl:Amidón ko:녹말 hi:मंड hr:Škrob io:Amilo id:Amilum is:Sterkja it:Amido he:עמילן ka:სახამებელი kk:Крахмал sw:Wanga la:Amylum lv:Ciete lt:Krakmolas lij:Sugo (chimica) hu:Keményítő mk:Скроб ml:അന്നജം ms:Kanji nl:Zetmeel ja:デンプン nap:Posema no:Stivelse nn:Stive oc:Amidon pl:Skrobia pt:Amido ro:Amidon qu:Miqu ru:Крахмал sq:Amidoni simple:Starch sk:Škrob sl:Škrob sr:Скроб sh:Škrob su:Aci fi:Tärkkelys sv:Stärkelse tl:Gawgaw ta:மாப்பொருள் th:แป้ง (อาหาร) tr:Nişasta uk:Крохмаль ur:نشاستہ vi:Tinh bột yi:קראכמל zh-yue:澱粉 zh:淀粉