{ Augusto Constancio Coello } { Carlos Hartling } { 1915 } The &quot; National Anthem of Honduras &quot; ( Spanish Himno Nacional de Honduras) was adopted under presidential decree 42 in 1915. { Honduras Universal Himnos del Pais } The lyrics were written by Augusto Constancio Coello and the music composed by Carlos Hartling. In its entirety, the anthem is a brief chronology of Honduran history. The anthem consists of the chorus and seven verses. But, for official acts, only the chorus and the seventh are sung. The chorus, which is sung before and after the seventh verse, is a description of Honduras&apos; chief national symbols, the flag and the coat of arms. The eighth verse, is a patriotic call to duty to Hondurans to defend the flag and the nation. By the time Hondurans complete their sixth year of elementary education, they will have memorized and been taught the meaning of all eight verses. Unofficially, the anthem is sometimes called &quot; Tu bandera es un lampo de cielo &quot; ( Spanish for &quot; Your flag is a splendor of sky &quot; ) which is also the first line of the chorus. [ Lyrics ] Embassy of Honduras in Washington, DC [http//www.hondurasemb.org/anthem.doc National Anthem of Honduras] Chorus: Your flag is a splendor of sky Crossed with a band of snow; And there can be seen, in its sacred depths, Five pale blue stars. In your emblem, which a rough sea With its wild waves shields, Behind the bare summit of a volcano, There is a star of clean light. Estrofa I India virgen y hermosa dormías De tus mares al canto sonoro, Cuando echada en tus cuencas de oro El audaz navegante te halló; Y al mirar tu belleza extasiado Al influjo ideal de tu encanto, La orla azul de tu espléndido manto Con un beso de amor consagró. Verse I Indian maiden, virgin and beautiful you slept, Of your seas to the resonant song, When lying in your valleys of gold, The bold navigator found you; And on seeing your enrapturing beauty, To the inflowing ideal of your enchantment, The blue hem of your splendid mantle With a kiss of love blessed. Estrofa II De un país donde el sol se levanta, Mas allá del Atlante azulado, Aquel hombre te había soñado Y en tu busca a la mar se lanzó. Cuando erguiste la pálida frente, En la viva ansiedad de tu anhelo, Bajo el dombo gentil de tu cielo Ya flotaba un extraño pendón. Verse II From a country where the sun rises, Beyond the blue Atlantic, That man who had dreamt you In search of you he launched to sea. When you raised your pale forehead, In the lively anxiousness of your hope, Under the gentle dome of your sky Already floated a strange banner. Estrofa III Era inutil que el indio tu amado Se aprestara a la lucha con ira, Porque envuelto en su sangre Lempira, En la noche profunda se hundió; Y de la épica hazaña, en memoria, La leyenda tan sólo ha guardado De un sepulcro el lugar ignorado Y el severo perfil de un peñón. Verse III It was useless that your beloved Indian Rushed into the fight with ire, Because, covered with his blood, Lempira, In the deep night he sank; And of the heroic deed, in memory, The legend alone has kept A sepulcher in a forgotten place, And the severe profile of a mountain peak. Estrofa IV Por tres siglos tus hijos oyeron El mandato imperioso del amo; Por tres siglos tu inútil reclamo En la atmosfera azul se perdió; Pero un día de gloria tu oído Percibió, poderoso y distante, Que allá lejos, por sobre el Atlante, Indignado rugía un León. Verse IV For three centuries your children heard The imperious mandate of the master; For three centuries your useless complaint In the blue atmosphere was lost But one glorious day your ear Perceived, powerful and distant, That there, far away, over the Atlantic, Indignantly, a lion roared Estrofa V Era Francia, la libre, la heroica, Que en su sueño de siglos dormida Despertaba iracunda a la vida Al reclamo viril de Dantón: Era Francia, que enviaba a la muerte La cabeza del Rey consagrado, Y que alzaba soberbia a su lado, El altar de la diosa razón. Verse V It was France, the free, the heroic, Which in its dreams of centuries slept, Awoke irate to life At the virile protest of Danton : It was France, who sent to the death The head of the consecrated King, And which built up proudly at its side, The altar of the goddess of Reason. Estrofa VI Tú también, ¡oh mi patria!, te alzaste De tu sueño servil y profundo; Tú también enseñaste al mundo Destrozando el infame eslabón. Y en tu suelo bendito, tras la alta Cabellera de monte salvaje, Como un ave de negro plumaje, La colonia fugaz se perdió Verse VI You also, oh my country!, arose From your servile deep sleep; You also showed the world Destroying the infamous shackle. And in your blessed soil, behind the tall Hair of the wild jungle, Like a bird of black feathers, The fleeting colony was lost. Estrofa VII Por guardar ese emblema divino, Marcharemos Oh! Patria a la muerte, Generosa será nuestra suerte, Si morimos pensando en tu amor. Defendiendo tu santa bandera Y en sus pliegues gloriosos cubiertos, Serán muchos, Honduras tus muertos, Pero todos caerán con honor. Verse VII To guard this divine emblem We shall march, oh fatherland, to the death; Our luck will be generous If we die thinking of your love. Defending your holy flag, And shrouded in its glorious folds, There will be many, Honduras, your dead, But all shall fall with honor. Coro:Tu bandera es un lampo de cielo Por un bloque de nieve cruzado; Y se ven en su fondo sagrado Cinco estrellas de pálido azul; En tu emblema, que un mar rumoroso Con sus ondas bravías escuda, De un volcán tras la cima desnuda Hay un astro de nítida luz. [ References ] [ External links ] Honduras: &apos;&apos;Himno Nacional de Honduras&apos;&apos; - Audio of the national anthem of Honduras, with information and lyrics Category:National anthems Category:Honduran culture Category:Spanish-language songs Category:1915 in Honduras ca:Tu bandera es un lampo de cielo de:Nationalhymne von Honduras el:Εθνικός ύμνος της Ονδούρας es:Himno nacional de Honduras fr:Tu bandera es un lampo de cielo ko:온두라스의 국가 jv:Tu bandera es un lampo de cielo lv:Hondurasas himna lt:Hondūro himnas nl:Tu bandera es un lampo de cielo ja:ホンジュラスの国歌 no:Tu bandera es un lampo de cielo pl:Hymn Hondurasu pt:Himno Nacional de Honduras ro:Tu bandera es un lampo de cielo ru:Гимн Гондураса fi:Tu bandera es un lampo de cielo sv:Tu bandera es un lampo de cielo tr:Tu bandera es un lampo de cielo zh:宏都拉斯國歌