[ the sporting equipment the meteorology equipment Snowboard (meteorology) ] [ March 2009 ] A snowboard with strap-in bindings A snowboarder practicing jibbing Snowboarder shown at several stages mid-flight. Snowboards are boards that are usually the width of one&apos;s foot longways, with the ability to glide on snow. { &quot; snowboarding. &quot; Dictionary.com Unabridged (v 1.1). Random House, Inc. 17 Mar. 2009. &lt; Dictionary.com http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/snowboarding &gt;. } Snowboards are differentiated from monoskis by the stance of the user. In monoskiing, the user stands with feet inline with direction of travel (facing tip of monoski/downhill) (parallel to long axis of board), whereas in snowboarding, users stand with feet transverse (more or less) to the longitude of the board. Users of such equipment may be referred to as snowboarders. Commercial snowboards generally require extra equipment such as bindings and special boots which help secure both feet of a snowboarder, who generally rides in an upright position. These type of boards are commonly used by people at ski hills or resorts for leisure, entertainment and competitive purposes in the activity called snowboarding. [ History ] In Europe and US, the first object that resembled a snowboard was invented by Sherman Poppen in 1968 and was called the Snurfer (a portmanteau of &quot; Snow &quot; and &quot; Surfer &quot; ). [ Marquardt, Katy King of the Hill in Snowboards US News and World Report September 29, 2008 ] The Snurfer was fairly simple and had no bindings. It is widely accepted that Jake Burton Carpenter (founder of Burton Snowboards ) and/or Tom Sims (founder of Sims Snowboards ) invented snowboarding. In 1981, a couple of Winterstick team riders went to France { http://www.winterstick.com/info.php?info=history } at the invitation of Alain Gaimard, marketing director at Les Arcs. After seeing an early film of this event, French skiers/surfers Augustin Coppey, Olivier Lehaneur, Olivier Roland and Antoine Yarmola made their first successful attempts during the winter of 1983 in France (Val Thorens), using primitive, home-made clones of the Winterstick. Starting with pure powder, skateboard-shaped wooden-boards equipped with aluminium fins, foot-straps and leashes, their technology evolved within a few years to pressed wood/fiber composite boards fitted with polyethylene soles, steel edges and modified ski boot shells. These were more suitable for the mixed conditions encountered while snowboarding mainly off-piste, but having to get back to ski lifts on packed snow. By 1986, although still very much a minority sport, commercial snowboards started appearing in leading French ski resorts. In 2008, selling snowboarding equipment was a $487 million industry. In 2008, average equipment ran about $540 including board, boots, and bindings. [ Board types ] [ June 2011 ] A size and shape variance in the boards accommodates different people, skill levels, snow conditions, and riding styles. Shorter boards are typically considered youth size, designed for use by children, though some varieties of short boards are specifically designed for a special purpose, such as the performance of snowboarding tricks. Such tricks may take place in a snowpark alongside freestyle skiers. Diagram of a &apos;&apos;&apos;Snowboard&apos;&apos;&apos; and its various elements that affect sizing. The bottom or &apos;base&apos; of the snowboard is generally made of various constructions of plastic, and is surrounded by a thin strip of steel, known as the &apos;edge&apos;. Artwork was primarily printed on PBT using a sublimation process in the 1990s, but poor color retention and fade after moderate use moved high-end producers to longer-lasting materials. [ January 2010 ] Snowboards come in several different styles, depending on the type of riding intended: Freestyle: The most common type. Generally shorter with moderate to soft flex. Freestyle boards are typically twin-tip in shape (mirror image along the lateral axis) to enable riding both ways (regular or goofy). Incorporates a deep sidecut for quick/tight turning. Used in the pipe and in the park on various jumps and terrain features including boxes, rails, and urban features Park/Jib (rails): Flexible and short to medium length, twin-tip shape with a twin flex and an outward stance to allow easy switch riding, and easy spinning, a wider stance, with the edges filed dull is used for skateboard-park like snowboard parks. Freeride: Longer than freestyle and park boards. Moderate to stiff in flex and typically directional (versus twin-tip). Used from back-country riding to park riding in various types of snow from groomed hard-packed snow to soft powdery snow. All-Mountain: Also very common. A mix between freeride and freestyle boards. The &apos;jack of all trades, master of none.&apos; Commonly twin-ish in shape (sometimes described as &quot; directional twin &quot; ) with an even flex on both sides of the board Racing/Alpine: Long, narrow, rigid, and directional shape. Used for slalom and giant slalom races, these boards are designed to excel on groomed slopes. Most often ridden with a &quot; hard &quot; plastic snowboard boot (similar to a ski boot), but also ridden recreationally with soft boots, particularly by riders in Europe. Splitboard: A snowboard which splits in half lengthwise, and allows the bindings to be quickly connected to hinges aligning them longitudinally on the board, allowing the halves of the boards to function as cross country skis. Used with removable skins on the base of the board, which easily slide forward on snow but not backwards, they allow a snowboard to easily travel into the backcountry. Once the rider is ready to descend, the board halves can simply be joined back together. Snowboards are generally constructed of a hardwood core which is sandwiched between multiple layers of fibreglass. Some snowboards incorporate the use of more exotic materials such as Carbon Fiber, Kevlar, Aluminium (as a honeycomb core structure), and have even incorporated Piezo dampers. The front (or &quot; nose, &quot; ) of the board is upturned to help the board glide over uneven snow. The back (or &quot; tail &quot; ) of the board is also upturned to enable backwards (or &quot; switch &quot; ) riding. The base (the side of the board which contacts the ground) is made of Polyethylene plastic. The two major types of base construction are Extruded and Sintered. An extruded base is a basic, low-maintenance design which basically consists of the plastic base material melted into its form. A sintered base uses the same material as an Extruded base, but first grinds the material into a powder, then, using heat and pressure, molds the material into its desired form. A sintered base is generally softer than its extruded counterpart, but has a porous structure which enables it to absorb wax. This wax absorption (along with a properly done &apos;hot wax&apos;), greatly reduces surface friction between the base and the snow. Snowboards with sintered bases are much faster, but require semi-regular maintenance and are easier to damage. The bottom-edges of the snowboard are fitted with a thin strip of steel, just a couple of millimeters wide. This steel edge allows the board to grab or &apos;dig in&apos; to hard snow and ice (like the blade of an ice skate), and also protects the boards internal structure. The top of the board is typically a layer of acrylic with some form of graphic designed to attract attention, showcase artwork, or serve the purpose similar to that of any other form of printed media. Flite Snowboards, an early and often underquoted designer, pressed the first closed-molded boards from a garage in Newport, RI in the mid 1980&apos;s. Snowboard topsheet graphics can be a highly personal statement and many riders spend many hours customizing the look of their boards. The top of some boards may even include thin inlays with other materials, and some are made entirely of epoxy-impregnated wood. The base of the board may also feature graphics, often designed in a manner to make the board&apos;s manufacturer recognizable in photos. See also: Board Construction Snowboard designs differ primarily in: [ 90 cm ] [ 215 cm ] [ 140 – 165 cm ] [ 28 cm ] [ 18 – 21 cm ] [ 15 cm ] [ 24 – 25 cm ] [ 26 cm ] [ 5 m ] [ 17 m ] [ 8 - 9 m ] [ February 2010 ] Length – Boards for children are as short as; boards for racers, or &quot; alpine &quot; riders, are as long as. Most people ride boards in the range. It is a myth that the height of the rider solely dictates the length of the snowboard. Rather, the length of a snowboard corresponds mainly to the style, weight, and preference of the rider. A good rule of thumb is to stay within the recommended manufacturer weight range. The longer the board, the more stable it is at high speed, but it is also a bit tougher to manoeuvre. Another factor riders consider when selecting a snowboard is the type of riding it will be used for, freestyle boards being shorter than all-mountain boards. Width – The width is typically measured at the waist of the board, since the nose and tail width varies with the sidecut and taper. Freestyle boards are up to wide, to assist with balance. Alpine boards are typically wide, although they can be as narrow as. Most folks ride boards in the range. Riders with larger feet (US size 10+) may have problems with narrower boards, as the rider&apos;s toes and/or heels may extend over the edge of the board, and interfere with the board&apos;s ability to make turns once it is set on edge, or &apos;get hung up on the snow.&apos; This is called toe/heel-drag, and can be cured by either choosing a wider board ( or more), adjusting the stance angle, or a combination of the two. Sidecut – The edges of the board are symmetrically curved concavely, so that the width at the tip and tail is greater than the center. This curve aids turning and affects the board&apos;s handling. The curve has a radius that might be a short as on a child&apos;s board or as large as on a racer&apos;s board. Most boards use a sidecut radius between. Shorter sidecut radii (tighter turns) are generally used for halfpipe riding while longer sidecut radii (wider turns) are used for freeride/alpine/racing riding. One new development in sidecuts was the introduction of Magne-Traction by Mervin, which manufactures: Lib Tech, GNU, and Roxy snowboards. Magne-Traction incorporates seven bumps on each side of the board which LibTech speculates will improve edge holding. Flex – The flexibility of a snowboard affects its handling and typically varies with the rider&apos;s weight. Usually a harder flex makes turning harder while a softer flex makes the board less stable at high speed. There is no standard way to quantify snowboard stiffness, but novices and boarders who mostly do rails tend to prefer softer flex, racers stiffer flex, and everyone else something in between. Park riders that enjoy jumps the most tend to ride stiffer twin boards. Tail/nose width – Many freestyle boards have equal nose/tail specs for equal performance either direction. Freeride and alpine boards, however, have a directional shape with a wider and longer nose. Boards designed for powder conditions exaggerate the differences even more for more flotation on the powder. Camber* – The curvature of the base of the snowboard effects handling and carving. Typical modern snowboards have an upward curvature of a few degrees along the effective edges. Experimentation has led to boards with rocker, or upward curvature, which makes for a more buttery board and can improve float in deep powder. [ Board construction ] Snowboard with step-in bindings and boots The various components of a snowboard are: Core: The core is the interior construction of the snowboard. It is typically made of laminated fiberglass around wood. Beech and Poplar are the most common woods, though other woods are used such as bamboo and birch. There have been continued experiments with aluminum, composite honeycomb, foam and resin to change, or substitute, the standard wood core. Desired properties of the core include damping, rebound, strength, flex and reduced weight. Base: The bottom of the board that is in contact with the snow surface. It is generally made of a porous, plastic (polyethylene) material, that is saturated with a wax to create a very quick and smooth, hydrophobic surface. P-Tex is a brand name that has become synonymous with base material. It is important that the base be &quot; slippery &quot;, with respect to the snow surface and board interaction. Bases are made to have amorphous areas that are porous to wax. Wax is an important finishing product for all base materials. Not only does it allow the snowboard to have a smoother glide, but it also allows the rider to change the characteristics of the base and adjust the board to the snow conditions. Different base waxes are available for different temperatures. The base, when maintained, will have a designed base structure that not only channels snow, air and water, but leaves it open enough for wax to penetrate deep inside it. This pattern is created with a stonegrind machine at the factory or a local ski shop. If the base is damaged, it is common to have it repaired in order to protect the core from exposure as well as reducing friction. Extruded : The P-Tex is cut from a large sheet, or squeezed out of a machine much like &quot; Play-Doh &quot;. A low maintenance base, it is the least expensive and easy to repair. Extruded bases are smoother and less porous than other bases. They do not saturate with wax well, and tend to slide slower than other bases. But left unwaxed they do not lose much overall performance. Extruded P-Tex is also cheaper than sintered P-Tex Sintered : P-Tex base material is ground to powder then reformed with pressure and heat, and cut to shape. A sintered base is very porous and absorbs wax well. Sintered bases slide faster than extruded bases when waxed, but will be slower if unwaxed for a period. They are more expensive, and harder to repair. Sintered Hybrid: Sintered bases may have graphite, gallium, indium or other materials added. These materials are used increase glide, strength, &quot; wax hold &quot; and other desired characteristics. Edge: A strip of metal, tuned normally to just less than 90-degrees, that runs the length of either side of the board. This sharp edge is necessary to be able to produce enough friction to ride on ice, and the radius of the edge directly affects the radius of carving turns, and in turn the responsiveness of the board. Kinking, rusting, or general dulling of the edge will significantly hinder the ability for the edge to grip the snow, so it is important that this feature is maintained. However, many riders who spend a fair amount of their time grinding park rails, and especially handrails, will actually use a detuning stone or another method to intentionally dull their edges, either entirely or only in certain areas. This helps to avoid &quot; catching &quot; on any tiny burrs or other obstructions that may exist or be formed on rails, boxes, and other types of grind. Catching on a rail can, more than likely, result in a potentially serious crash, particularly should it occur on a handrail or more advanced rail set-up. In addition, it&apos;s relatively common for freestyle riders to &quot; detune &quot; the edges around the board&apos;s contact points. This practice can help to reduce the chances of the rider catching an edge in a choppy or rutted-out jump landing or similar situation. It is important to keep in mind that drastic edge detuning can be near-impossible to fully reverse and will significantly impede board control &amp; the ability to hold an edge in harder-packed snow. One area where this can be quite detrimental is in a half-pipe, where well-sharpened edges are often crucially important for cutting through the hard, sometimes icy, walls. Laminate: The snowboard&apos;s core is also sandwiched on the top and bottom by at least two layers of fiberglass. The fiberglass adds stiffness and torsional strength to the board. The fiberglass laminate may be either biaxial (fibers running the length of the board and more fibers 90 degrees perpendicular to it), triax (fibers running the length of the board with 45 degree fibers running across it), or quadax (a hybrid of the biax and triax). Some snowboards also add carbon and aramid (also known as Twaron or Kevlar ) stringers for additional elasticity and strength. [ April 2011 ] [ http://www.bettersnowboarding.com/typesofsnowboards.html Types Of Snowboards Bettersnowboarding.com 2010-02-09 ] Camber: Camber refers to the bend of the board from tip to tail. Traditionally boards have a raised camber, meaning that if one were to lay it flat the board comes off the ground between the spots where one&apos;s feet would be (contact points). Recently companies have begun to manufacture a number of new camber designs. All fall into these four main categories. Regular: As described above the board flexes up when laid down flat. This is the original design and still the most widely used board form as it is the oldest. Reverse: The exact opposite of regular. The board is bent upwards starting at the middle, so that when laid flat the nose and tail are significantly off the ground. This design is ideal for park and freestyle as it allows a much smoother 360-degree rotation on both snow and rails. When standing on the board it is flexed down at the contact points by your weight, but can easily be lifted by shifting your weight off either foot. Sims first released this design in 1985, however, it was popularized recently by companies such as Lib-Tech and K2 Snowboarding. De-cambered: The idea is similar to &quot; Reversed &quot; but the lift doesn&apos;t start until after the contact points, making the board flat between your feet. This design works well in powder due to its naturally raised tips and its use of the entire edge when turning. The Kinked design also fares well in parks as it has the turning and spin benefits of the &quot; Reverse &quot; camber design. This design is the newest out of the four in terms of form. Flat: The board is entirely flat from nose to tail. Because there is no curve these are better suited for casual free riding and most big-air features in park (big-air jumps/pipe). Production: There are some manufactures that perform the entire process of snowboard construction and they manufacture over 500 per day with at least 30 different models. There is a great amount of manual work that goes into it as opposed to all of it being performed by machines and robots. [ Boots ] Snowboard boots are mostly considered soft boots, though alpine snowboarding uses a harder boot similar to a ski boot. A boot&apos;s primary function is to transfer the rider&apos;s energy into the board, protect the rider with support, and keep the rider&apos;s feet warm. A snowboarder shopping for boots is usually looking for a good fit, flex, and looks. Boots can have different features such as lacing styles, heat molding liners, and gel padding that the snowboarder also might be looking for. Tradeoffs include rigidity versus comfort, and built in forward lean, versus comfort. There are three incompatible types: [ http://snowboarding.about.com/cs/boots/bb/BYBboots.htm Snowboarding – Guide to Snowboarding, Snowboard Gear, Snowboard Resorts and Events Snowboarding.about.com 2010-02-09 ] Standard (soft) boots fit &quot; flow &quot; and &quot; strap &quot; bindings and are by far the most common. No part of the boot specifically attaches to the board. Instead, the binding applies pressure in several places to achieve firm contact. &quot; Step in &quot; boots have a metal clasp on the bottom to attach to &quot; step in &quot; bindings. The boot must match the binding. Hard boots are used with special bindings. [ Bindings ] { Bindings are separate components from the snowboard deck and are very important parts of the total snowboard interface. The bindings&apos; main function is to hold the rider&apos;s boot in place tightly to transfer their energy to the board. Most bindings are attached to the board with four screws that are placed in the center of the binding. Although a rather new technology from } { Burton called Infinite channel system } [ http://www.transworldsnowboarding.com/article.jsp?ID%3D1000023979 Burton Expands Infinite Channel System &amp; EST Hardgoods Transworld Snowboarding 2010-02-09 ] { uses two screws, both on the outsides of the binding. } There are several types of bindings. Strap-in, step-in, and hybrid bindings are used by most recreational riders and all freestyle riders. [ Strap-in ] [ June 2011 ] These are the most popular bindings in snowboarding. Before snowboard specific boots existed, snowboarders used any means necessary to attach their feet to their snowboards and gain the leverage needed for turning. Typical boots used in these early days of snowboarding were Sorels or snowmobile boots. These boots were not designed for snowboarding and did not provide the support desired for doing turns on the heel edge of a snowboard. As a result, early innovators such as Louis Fournier conceived the &quot; high-back &quot; binding design which was later commercialized and patented by Jeff Grell. The highback binding is the technology produced by most binding equipment manufacturers in the snowboard industry. The leverage provided by highbacks greatly improved board control. Snowboarder&apos;s such as Craig Kelly adapted plastic &quot; tongues &quot; to their boots to provide the same support for toe side turns, as the highback provided for heel side turns. In response, companies such as Burton and Gnu began to offer &quot; tongues &quot;. With modern strap-bindings, the rider wears a boot which has a thick but flexible sole, and padded uppers. The foot is held onto the board with two buckle straps – one strapped across the top of the toe area, and one across the ankle area. They can be tightly ratcheted closed for a tight fit and good rider control of the board. Straps are typically padded to more evenly distribute pressure across the foot. While nowhere near as popular as two-strap bindings, some people prefer three-strap bindings for more specialized riding such as carving. The third strap tends to provide additional stiffness to the binding. Cap Strap bindings are a recent modification that provide a very tight fit to the toe of the boot, and seats the boot more securely in the binding. Numerous companies have adopted various versions of the cap strap. [ Step-in ] [ June 2011 ] Innovators of step-in systems produced prototypes and designed proprietary step-in boot and binding systems with the goal of improving the performance of snowboard boots and bindings, and as a result, the mid-90s saw an explosion of step-in binding and boot development. New companies, Switch and Device, were built on new step-in binding technology. Existing companies Shimano, K2 and Emery were also quick to market with new step-in technology. Meanwhile early market leaders Burton and Sims were noticeably absent from the step-in market. Sims was the first established industry leader to market with a step-in binding. Sims licensed a step-in system called DNR which was produced by the established ski-binding company Marker. Marker never improved the product which was eventually discontinued. Sims never re-entered the step-in market. The risk of commercial failure from a poorly performing Step-in binding presented serious risk to established market leaders. This was evidenced by Airwalk who enjoyed 30% market share in snowboard boot sales when they began development of their step-in binding system. The Airwalk step-in System experienced serious product failure at the first dealer demonstrations, seriously damaging the company&apos;s credibility and heralded a decline in the company&apos;s former position as the market leader in Snowboard boots. Established snowboarding brands seeking to gain market share while reducing risk, purchased proven step-in innovators. For example snowboard boot company Vans purchased the Switch step-in company, while Device step-in company was purchased by Ride Snowboards. Although initially refusing to expose themselves to the risk and expense associated with bringing a step-in system to market, Burton chose to focus primarily on improvements to existing strap-in technology. However, Burton eventually released 2 models of step-in systems, the SI and the PSI, Burton&apos;s SI system enjoyed moderate success, yet never matched the performance of the company&apos;s strap-in products and was never improved upon. Burton never marketed any improvements to either of their step-in binding systems and eventually discontinued the products. Most Popular (and incompatible) step-in systems used unique and proprietary mechanisms, such as the step-ins produced by Burton, Rossignol and Switch. Shimano and K2 used a technology similar to clipless bicycle pedals. Burton and K2 Clicker step-in binding systems are no longer in production as both companies have opted to focus on the strap-in binding system. Rossignol remains as the sole provider of step-in binding systems and offers them primarily to the rental market as most consumers and retailers alike have been discouraged by lack of adequate development and industry support for step-in technology. [ Speed entry ] There are also proprietary systems that seek to combine the convenience of step-in systems with the control levels attainable with strap-ins. An example is the Flow binding system which is similar to a strap-in binding, except that the foot enters the binding through the back (which then clips into place) rather than the top. The rider&apos;s boot is held down by an adjustable webbing that covers most of the foot. Newer Flow models have connected straps in place of the webbing found on older models; these straps are also micro adjustable. In 2004, K2 released the Cinch series, a similar rear entry binding; riders slip their foot in as they would a Flow binding, however rather than webbing, the foot is held down by straps. [ Highback ] A stiff molded support behind the heel and up the calf area. The HyBak was originally designed by inventor Jeff Grell and built by Flite Snowboards. This allows the rider to apply pressure and effect a &quot; heelside &quot; turn. Some high backs are stiff vertically but provide some flex for twisting of the riders legs. [ Plate ] Plate bindings are used with hardboots on Alpine or racing snowboards. Extreme carvers and some Boarder Cross racers also use plate bindings. The stiff bindings and boots give much more control over the board and allow the board to be carved much more easily than with softer bindings. Alpine snowboards tend to be longer and thinner with a much stiffer flex for greater edge hold and better carving performance. Snowboard bindings, unlike ski bindings, do not automatically release upon impact or after falling over. With skis, this mechanism is designed to protect from injuries (particularly to the knee) caused by skis torn in different directions. Automatic release is not required in snowboarding, as the rider&apos;s legs are fixed in a static position and twisting of the knee joint cannot occur to the same extent. Furthermore it reduces the dangerous prospect of a board hurtling downhill riderless, and the rider slipping downhill on his back with no means to maintain grip on a steep slope. Nevertheless, some ski areas require the use of a &quot; leash &quot; that connects the snowboard to the rider&apos;s leg or boot, in case the snowboard manages to get away from its rider. This is most likely to happen when the rider removes the board at the top or the bottom of a run (or while on a chairlift, which could be dangerous). A Noboard is a snowboard binding alternative with only peel and stick pads applied directly to any snowboard deck and no attachment. [ Stomp pad ] Placed between the bindings, but closer to the rear binding the Stomp pads&apos; only purpose is to allow the rider to better control the board with only one boot strapped in, such as when maneuvering onto a chair lift or riding a ski tow. Whereas the upper surface of the board is smooth, the stomp pad has a textured pattern which provides grip to the underside of the boot. Stomp pads can be decorative and vary in their size, shape and the kind and number of small spikes or friction points they provide. [ Stances ] [ June 2011 ] Goofy stance There are two types of stance-direction used by snowboarders. A &quot; regular &quot; stance places the rider&apos;s left foot at the front of the snowboard. &quot; Goofy &quot;, the opposite stance direction, places the rider&apos;s right foot at the front, as in skateboarding. Regular is the most common. There are different ways to determine whether a rider is &quot; regular &quot; or &quot; goofy &quot;. One method used for first time riders is to observe the first step forward when walking or climbing up stairs. The first foot forward would be the foot set up at the front of the snowboard. Another method used for first time riders is to use the same foot that you kick a football with as your back foot (though this can be an inaccurate sign for some, as there are people who prefer goofy though are right handed, and therefore naturally kick a football with their right foot). This is a good method for setting up the snowboard stance for a new snowboarder. However having a surfing or skateboarding background will also help a person determine their preferred stance, although not all riders will have the same stance skateboarding and snowboarding. The most accurate way to determine a rider&apos;s stance is to get the rider to run and slide on a tiled or wooden floor, wearing only socks, and observe which foot the person puts forward during the slide. This simulates the motion of riding a snowboard and exposes that persons natural tendency to put a particular foot forward. Lastly, a trickier method is to stand behind the first-timer and give them a shove, enough for them to put one foot forward to stop themselves from falling. [ July 2010 ] Most experienced riders are able to ride in the opposite direction to their usual stance (i.e. a &quot; regular &quot; rider would lead with their right foot instead of their left foot). This is called riding &quot; fakie &quot; or &quot; switch &quot;. [ Stance width ] [ June 2011 ] Stance width helps determine the rider&apos;s balance on the board. The size of the rider is an important factor as well as the style of their riding when determining a proper stance width. A common measurement used for new riders is to position the bindings so that the feet are placed a little wider than shoulder width apart. Another, less orthodox form of measurement may be taken by putting your feet together and place your hands, palm down, on the ground in a straight line with your body by squatting down. This generally gives a good natural measurement for how wide of a base your body uses to properly balance itself when knees are bent. However, personal preference and comfort are important and most experienced riders will adjust the stance width to personal preference. Skateboarders should find that their snowboarding and skateboarding stance widths are relatively similar. A wider stance, common for freestyle riders, gives more stability when landing a jump or jibbing a rail. Control in a wider stance is reduced when turning on the piste. Conversely a narrow stance will give the rider more control when turning on the piste but less stability when freestyling. A narrow stance is more common for riders looking for quicker turn edge-hold (i.e. small radius turns). The narrow stance will give the rider a concentrated stability between the bindings allowing the board to dig into the snow quicker than a wider stance so the rider is less prone to wash out. [ Binding angle ] [ June 2011 ] Binding angle is defined by the degrees off of perpendicular from the length of the snowboard. A binding angle of 0° is when the foot is perpendicular to the length of the snowboard. Positive angles are pointed towards the front of the board, whereas negative angles are pointed towards the back of the board. The question of how much the bindings are angled depends on the rider&apos;s purpose and preference. Different binding angles can be used for different types of snowboarding. Someone who participates in freestyle competition would have a much different &quot; stance &quot; than someone who explores backcountry and powder. The recent advancement and boom of snowboard culture and technology has made binding angle adjustments relatively easy. Binding companies design their bindings with similar baseplates that can easily mount onto any type of snowboard regardless of the brand. With the exception of Burton, and their newly released &quot; channel system &quot;, adjusting bindings is something that remains constant among all snowboarders. Done with a small screw-driver or a snowboard tool, the base plates on bindings can be easily rotated to whatever preferred stance. One must un-screw the baseplate, pick their degree angles, and then re-screw the baseplates. Bindings should also regularly be checked to ensure that the screws don&apos;t come undone from the movements of snowboarding. Forward stance: Suitable for most purposes, both feet are angled forward. Frequently the leading foot is angled roughly 15° to 21° and the trailing foot at 0° to 10°. A downside is that a rider&apos;s balance is notably different when riding in reverse compared to their forward stance. This can be compensated for by learning how to ride backwards with this stance, also known as riding &quot; switch &quot;, or by choosing another stance such as Duck, or Flat stance. As riders become more experienced, they can experiment with different &quot; stances &quot; to feel what is best for them. Alpine stance: Used primarily for alpine racing, the leading foot may be from 50° up to around 70° and the trailing foot generally identical or up to 10˚ less. This gives the rider balance on their board, while angling their feet for best directional control at high speeds. Duck stance: Useful for tricks by removing the forward bias altogether, the feet are angled outwards in opposite directions, such as 15° for the front foot and -6° for the back foot. This stance is becoming increasingly popular, and is the most resilient of the three. The feet do not actually have to be angled equally outwards to be considered duck stance. The back foot simply has to be angled less than zero degrees. These angles give the rider a dominant front foot angle at all times which makes it easier for a rider to change the board direction mid-run. This change in board direction mid-run is called riding &quot; Switch &quot; or &quot; Fakie &quot;. Duck stance is also very popular for park riders because it gives them the versatility to move their board in all directions. It is easier to spin, balance on rails and boxes, and land &quot; switch &quot; when one&apos;s feet are both angled outward. The degree of the angle depends on the individual. Flat stance: Also popular with riders who wish to have a consistent stance riding forward or backward, a flat stance is simply one in which both feet are at a zero angle, or perpendicular to the length of the board. This may result in &quot; toe drag &quot; on narrower boards or if the rider has larger feet, in which the rider&apos;s toes overhang the edge of the board and may contact the snow during sharp turns on the toe side of the board. The &quot; Flat &quot; Stance is no longer popular and is not recommended by the AASI (American Association of Snowboard Instructors). Riders who use the flat stance will commonly experience pain in their ankles and calves when turning toe-side and heel-side. [ Danger and notable Deaths ] Snowboarding can also be dangerous for inexperienced boarders. People have died as a result of snowboarding accidents. [ February 2012 ] [ Notable snowboarders ] Gretchen Bleiler Terje Håkonsen Lindsey Jacobellis Jeremy Jones Danny Kass Craig Kelly Travis Rice Hannah Teter Shaun White [ See also ] Snowboarding List of snowboard tricks Ski Snurfer SSX Monoski Freeboard (skateboard) [ References ] [ Further reading ] Hart, Lowell (1997). The Snowboard Book: A Guide for All Boarders. W.W. Norton &amp; Company. ISBN 0-393-31692-0 Snowboard Size Chart – &quot; Snowboard Sizing by Height and Weight &quot; – http://www.snowboardsizing.org Sherman Poppen and the Snurfer - http://www.mashf.com/2001_inductees.htm#Sherman Category:Snowboarding Category:Sliding vehicles bg:Сноуборд ca:Planxa de neu cs:Snowboard da:Snowboard es:Tabla de Snowboard eo:Neĝtabulo fa:اسنوبرد lt:Snieglentė pl:Deska snowboardowa ru:Сноуборд (спортивный инвентарь) sco:Snawbuird fi:Lumilauta tr:Snowboard uk:Сноуборд