{ USS &apos;&apos;Wisconsin&apos;&apos; is one of three &apos;&apos;Iowa&apos;&apos; class battleships opened to the public as a museum (berthed at } { Nauticus in Norfolk, VA), and one of two &apos;&apos;Iowa&apos;&apos; class battleships maintained in the } { US Mothball fleet. Although unlikely, there exists a possibility that &apos;&apos;Wisconsin&apos;&apos; may be reactivated again in the service of her country. } { Maritime Museum in } { Szczecin, } { Poland } A maritime museum (sometimes nautical museum) is a museum specializing in the display of objects relating to ship s and travel on large bodies of water. A subcategory of maritime museums are naval museums, which focus on navies and the military use of the sea. The great prize of a maritime museum is a historic ship (or a replica) made accessible as a museum ship, but these are large and require a considerable budget to maintain, many museums preserve smaller or more fragile ships or partial ships within the museum buildings and most museums exhibit interesting pieces of ships (such as a figurehead or cannon ), ship model s, and miscellaneous small items like cutlery, uniform s, and so forth. Ship model lers often have a close association with maritime museums; not only does the museum have items that help the modeller achieve better accuracy, but the museum provides a display space for models larger than will comfortably fit in a modeller&apos;s home; and of course the museum is happy to take a ship model as a donation. Museums will also commission models. There are thousands of maritime museums in the world. Many belong to the International Congress of Maritime Museums (ICMM), which coordinates members&apos; efforts to acquire, preserve, and display their material. At 40 acres (162,000  m²), Mystic Seaport in Mystic, Connecticut can lay claim to the title of largest museum; it preserves not only a number of sailing ship s, but also a large number of original seaport buildings, including a ship chandlery, sail loft, ropewalk, and so forth. However, the UK &apos;s National Maritime Museum in Greenwich is also a contender, with many items of great historical significance, such as the actual uniform worn by Horatio Nelson at the Battle of Trafalgar. A recent activity of maritime museums is to build replicas of ships, since there are few survivors that have not already been restored and put on display. [ Preservation of ships ] The preservation of ships in museums ensures that ancient and historic vessels are preserved for posterity in optimum conditions and are available for academic study and for public education and interest. Remains of ancient and historic ships and boats can be seen in museum s around the world. Where a ship is in a good state of preservation it can sometimes act as a museum in its own right. Many museum ships, such as HMS Victory are popular tourist attractions. Some ships are too fragile to be exposed outdoors or are incomplete and must be preserved indoors. The remains of the Mary Rose for example are kept in a purpose designed building so that conservation treatment can be applied. In some cases, archaeologists have discovered traces of ships and boats where there are no extant physical remains to be preserved, such as Sutton Hoo, where museum displays can show what the vessel would have looked like, although the vessel itself no longer exists. [ Notable maritime museums ] See also: List of Transport Museums [ Asia and Oceania ] Australian National Maritime Museum, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia Hong Kong Maritime Museum, Stanley, Hong Kong Hoods Tower Naval Museum, Trincomalee, Sri Lanka Macau Maritime Museum, Macau Maritime Museum of Indonesia, Jakarta, Indonesia Museum of Maritime Science, Tokyo, Japan National Maritime Museum Auckland, New Zealand National Maritime Museum, Galle, Sri Lanka Western Australian Maritime Museum, Fremantle, Western Australia, Australia Pakistan Maritime Museum, Karachi, Pakistan National Research Institute of Maritime Cultural Heritage, Mokpo, South Korea [ Europe ] { Genoa, the largest Maritime Museum of the Mediterranean http://www.museidigenova.it/spip.php?rubrique251 } Maritime Center Vellamo, Kotka, Finland Cité de la Mer, Cherbourg-Octeville, France Víkin, Maritime Museum in Reykjavik, Iceland National Maritime Museum of Ireland, Dún Laoghaire, Ireland Galata Museo del Mare in Genoa, Italy Museo Storico Navale in Venice, Italy Museo Tecnico Navale in La Spezia, Italy Nederlands Scheepvaartmuseum, Amsterdam, Netherlands Maritime Museum in Szczecin, Poland Museu de Marinha, Lisbon, Portugal Museum of the World Ocean, Kaliningrad, Russia Maritime Museum Ria de Bilbao, Bilbao, Spain Maritime Museum, Stockholm, Sweden Naval Museum of Madrid Vasa Museum, Stockholm, Sweden Turkish Naval Museum, Istanbul, Turkey Eyemouth Maritime Centre, Eyemouth, Scotland, United Kingdom Hull Maritime Museum, Kingston upon Hull, United Kingdom Museum of Hartlepool, Hartlepool, England, United Kingdom National Maritime Museum, Greenwich, England, United Kingdom Portsmouth Historic Dockyard, Portsmouth, England, United Kingdom Southampton Maritime Museum, Southampton, England, United Kingdom Scottish Maritime Museum, Irvine, Scotland, United Kingdom Royal Danish Naval Museum, Copenhagen, Denmark Aalborg Søfarts- og Marinemuseum, Aalborg, Denmark The Danish Maritime Museum, Kronborg Castle, Elsinore, Denmark The Fisheries and Maritime Museum, Esbjerg, Denmark The Frigate Jylland, Ebeltoft, Denmark Rauma Maritime Museum, Rauma, Finland German Maritime Museum, Bremerhaven, Germany [ North America ] The Council of American Maritime Museums serves as network for museum professionals in North America. Baltimore Maritime Museum, Baltimore, Maryland, US Bermuda Maritime Museum, Sandys Parish, Bermuda Columbia River Maritime Museum, Astoria, Oregon, US Coral World Ocean Park, St. Thomas, U.S. Virgin Islands Dossin Great Lakes Museum, Detroit, Michigan, US Great Lakes Floating Maritime Museum, Duluth, Minnesota, US H. Lee White Marine Museum, Oswego, New York, US Hampton Roads Naval Museum, Norfolk, Virginia, US Herreshoff Marine Museum, Bristol, Rhode Island, US Lake Champlain Maritime Museum, Basin Harbor, Vermont, US Long Island Maritime Museum, Long Island, New York, US Los Angeles Maritime Museum, Los Angeles, California, US Mariners&apos; Museum, Newport News, Virginia, US Maritime &amp; Seafood Industry Museum, Biloxi, MS, US Maritime Museum of British Columbia, Victoria, British Columbia, Canada Maritime Museum of San Diego, San Diego, California, US Maritime Museum of the Atlantic, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada Maritime Museum, San Francisco Maritime National Historical Park, California, US Mystic Seaport, Mystic, Connecticut, US National Museum of Naval Aviation, Pensacola, Florida, US Nauticus, Norfolk, Virginia, US Naval Undersea Museum, Keyport, Washington, US Naval War College Museum, Newport, Rhode Island, US New Bedford Whaling Museum, New Bedford, Massachusetts, US PT Boat Museum, Fall River, Massachusetts, US Santa Barbara Maritime Museum, Port Hueneme, California US Site historique maritime de la Pointe-au-Père, Rimouski, Quebec, Canada South Street Seaport, New York, New York, US Tahoe Maritime Museum, Homewood, California, US Tuckerton Seaport, Tuckerton, New Jersey, US United States Naval Academy Museum, Annapolis, Maryland, US U.S. Navy Museum, Washington, D.C., US U.S. Navy Submarine Force Library and Museum, Groton, Connecticut, US USS Constitution Museum, Boston, Massachusetts, US Vancouver Maritime Museum, Vancouver British Columbia, Canada Wisconsin Maritime Museum, Manitowoc, Wisconsin, US [ Central America ] Maritime Museum (Belize) [ South America ] Museo Nao Victoria (Chile) Peruvian Naval Museum Naval Museum of Montevideo MUSEO NAVAL DE MONTEVIDEO. R.O. DEL URUGUAY [ Middle East ] Maritime Museum of Kuwait [ See also ] List of maritime museums in the United States List of museum ships Museum ship National Maritime Museums Ship replica Ships preserved in museums [ References ] Aymar, B. (1967). A pictorial treasury of the marine museums of the world; A guide to the maritime collections, restorations, replicas, and marine museums in twenty-three countries. New York: Crown. Evans, M. H., &amp; West, J. (1998). Maritime museums: A guide to the collections and museum ships in Britain and Ireland. London: Chatham Pub. Neill, P., &amp; Krohn, B. E. (1991). Great maritime museums of the world. New York: Balsam Press in association with H.N. Abrams. Smith, R. H. (2006). Smith&apos;s guide to maritime museums of North America. Del Mar, CA: C Books. Stammers, M. (1978). Discovering maritime museums and historic ships. Discovering series, no. 228. Aylesbury [England]: Shire Publications Stanford, J. M. (1990). Sea history&apos;s guide to American and Canadian maritime museums. Croton-on-Hudson: Sea History Press. Sullivan, D. (1978). Old ships, boats &amp; maritime museums. London: Coracle Books. [ External links ] ICMM website Nauticus Norfolk, VA Maritime and Naval Museums in Britain and Ireland USA museum list Non-USA museum list Maritime Museums worldwide Maritime Museums in Europe Category:Types of museum ca:Museu Marítim de:Liste von Marinemuseen et:Meremuuseum es:Museo marítimo fr:Musée de la Marine hr:Pomorski muzej nl:Maritiem Museum ja:海事博物館 tr:Denizcilik müzesi