[ &quot; Unter der Linden &quot;, a poem by Walther von der Vogelweide ] Centre strip in autumn Unter den Linden ( &quot; under the linden trees &quot; ) is a boulevard in the Mitte district of Berlin, the capital of Germany. It is named for its linden (lime in British English) trees that line the grassed pedestrian mall between two carriageway s. Unter den Linden runs east–west from the site of the former Stadtschloss royal palace at the Lustgarten park, where the demolished Palast der Republik used to be, to Pariser Platz and Brandenburg Gate. Eastward the boulevard crosses the Spree river at Berlin Cathedral and continues as Karl-Liebknecht-Straße. The western continuation behind Brandenburg Gate is Straße des 17. Juni. Major north–south streets crossing Unter den Linden are Friedrichstraße and Wilhelmstrasse. J. Stridbeck, &apos;&apos;LindenAllee 1691&apos;&apos; Unter den Linden at the heart of the historic section of Berlin developed from a bridle path laid out by Elector John George of Brandenburg in the 16th century to reach his hunting grounds in the Tiergarten. It was replaced by a boulevard of linden trees planted in 1647, extending from the city palace to the gates of the city, by order of the “Great Elector” Frederick William. While the western part of the boulevard retained its character, the area around present-day Bebelplatz was integrated into the fortification of Berlin in the aftermath of the Thirty Years&apos; War, visible until today as there are no trees. By the 19th century, as Berlin grew and expanded to the west, Unter den Linden became the best-known and grandest street in Berlin. In 1851 the famous equestrian statue of King Frederick II of Prussia was erected on the centre strip, designed by Christian Daniel Rauch. In the course of the building of the Nord-Süd-Tunnel for the Berlin S-Bahn in 1934–35, most of the linden trees were cut down and during the last days of World War II the remaining trees were destroyed or cut down for firewood. The present-day linden were replanted in the 1950s; [ July 2007 ] they are affected by air pollution as well as by soil contamination. [ Points of interest ] Map showing the main points of interest Since 1937, the numbering [ March 2011 ] has started at the Schlossbrücke (Palace Bridge), connecting Unter den Linden with the Lustgarten and Museum Island. The disputed replica of the Alte Kommandantur is No. 1, vis-à-vis the Zeughaus arsenal, the oldest building on Unter den Linden, built between 1695 and 1706, today the seat of the Deutsches Historisches Museum (No. 2). Buildings along the street include (from east to west) the Crown Princes Palace (former palace of the Hohenzollern crown princes, No. 3), the Neue Wache war memorial built in 1817 (No. 4), considered by many [ January 2012 ] to be Karl Friedrich Schinkel ’s masterpiece. Furthermore on Bebelplatz the Berlin State Opera (No. 7), colloquially called Lindenoper, St. Hedwig&apos;s Cathedral and the Altes Palais (No. 9), favoured residence of Emperor Wilhelm I; in the north the main building of the Humboldt University (No. 6) and House I of the Berlin State Library (No. 8). On the western end are the Russian Embassy (former Soviet Embassy, No. 63-65) the Hungarian Embassy (No. 76) at the corner of Wilhelmstrasse and finally the Hotel Adlon (No. 77) at the corner of Pariser Platz, which has been completely rebuilt on the site of the prewar hotel. Well-known statues of Alexander and Wilhelm von Humboldt in front of the university as well as of the Prussian generals Scharnhorst and Bülow also adorn the street.The street sign that dates from before the 1930s can be found at the Imperial War Museum, London. [ both ] [ Along Unter den Linden ] Aerial view of Unter den Linden from Berlin Cathedral to Brandenburg Gate At night Christmas illumination Eastern end at Schlossbrücke ( Palace Bridge) Alte Kommandantur Zeughaus (now Deutsches Historisches Museum ) Neue Wache (New Guard House) memorial Berlin State Opera, one of several neoclassical buildings on Bebelplatz Main building of Humboldt University Equestrian statue of King Frederick II of Prussia, facing east Hotel Adlon Brandenburg Gate at Pariser Platz, which marks the western terminus [ See also ] Berlin Brandenburger Tor station – formerly Berlin Unter den Linden [ External links ] [ Unter den Linden ] Unter den Linden - Interactive 360° Panorama Webcam: Live-View of the street Unter den Linden with Brandenburg Gate in Berlin, Germany [ 52.51658 N 13.381 E type:landmark_region:DE title ] Category:Streets in Berlin Category:Prussian cultural sites Category:Mitte ar:جادة أونتر دين لندن be:Унтэр-дэн-Ліндэн be-x-old:Унтэр-дэн-Ліндэн br:Unter den Linden cy:Unter den Linden da:Unter den Linden de:Unter den Linden es:Unter den Linden eo:Unter den Linden eu:Unter den Linden fr:Unter den Linden gl:Unter den Linden it:Unter den Linden he:אונטר דן לינדן lb:Unter den Linden hu:Unter den Linden nl:Unter den Linden ja:ウンター・デン・リンデン no:Unter den Linden pnb:انتر دن لندن pl:Unter den Linden pt:Unter den Linden ru:Унтер-ден-Линден simple:Unter den Linden sk:Unter den Linden fi:Unter den Linden sv:Unter den Linden tr:Unter den Linden uk:Унтер-ден-Лінден zh:菩提樹下大街