[ Dunlin LC IUCN3.1 Calidris-alpina-001_edit.jpg Breeding adult Animal ia Chordata Aves Charadriiformes Scolopacidae Calidris C. alpina Calidris alpina ( Linnaeus, 1758 ) Synonyms Erolia alpinaPelidna alpina ] The Dunlin, Calidris alpina, is a small wader, sometimes separated with the other &quot; stint s &quot; in Erolia. It is a circumpolar breeder in Arctic or subarctic regions. Birds that breed in northern Europe and Asia are long-distance migrants, wintering south to Africa, southeast Asia and the Middle East. Birds that breed in Alaska and the Canadian Arctic migrate short distances to the Pacific and Atlantic coasts of North America, although those nesting in Northern Alaska overwinter in Asia. Many Dunlins winter along the Iberian south coast. [ Behavior ] Wintering on Florida&apos;s Gulf Coast. The Dunlin is highly gregarious in winter, sometimes forming large flocks on coastal mudflats or sandy beaches. Large numbers can often be seen swirling in synchronized flight on stop-overs during migration or on their winter habitat. This bird is one of the most common and best-known waders throughout its breeding and wintering ranges, and it is the species with which other waders tend to be compared. At 17–21  cm length and a 32–36  cm wingspan, it is similar in size to a Common Starling, but stouter, with a thick bill. The Dunlin moves along the coastal mudflat beaches it prefers with a characteristic &quot; sewing machine &quot; feeding action, methodically picking small food items. Insect s form the main part of the Dunlin&apos;s diet on the nesting grounds; it eats mollusk s, worm s and crustacean s in coastal areas. On the East coast of England [ Appearance ] An adult Dunlin in breeding plumage shows the distinctive black belly which no other similar-sized wader possesses. The winter Dunlin is basically grey above and white below. Juveniles are brown above with two whitish &quot; V &quot; shapes on the back. They usually have black marks on the flanks or belly and show a strong white wingbar in flight The legs and slightly decurved bill are black. There are a number of subspecies differing mainly in the extent of rufous coloration in the breeding plumage and the bill length. It should, however, be noted that bill length varies between sexes, the females having longer bills than the males. [ Nesting ] The nest is a shallow scrape on the ground lined with vegetation, into which typically four eggs are laid and incubated by the male and female parents. Chicks are precocial, however are brooded during early development. They start to fly at approximately three weeks of age. The majority of brood care is provided by the male, as the female deserts the brood and often leaves the breeding area. The call is a typical sandpiper &quot; peep &quot;, and the display song a harsh trill. The Dunlin is one of the species to which the Agreement on the Conservation of African-Eurasian Migratory Waterbirds ( AEWA ) applies. Apparent hybrids between this species and the White-rumped Sandpiper as well as with the Purple Sandpiper have been reported from the Atlantic coasts of North America (McLaughlin &amp; Wormington, 2000, and external link below) and Europe (Millington, 1994), respectively. [ References ] [ BirdLife International 2004 49088 Calidris alpina 9 May 2006 ] Database entry includes justification for why this species is of least concern McLaughlin K. A. &amp; Wormington, A. (2000): An apparent Dunlin × White-rumped Sandpiper hybrid. Ontario Birds 18(1): 8-12. [ Martin-Löf P. Per Martin-Löf Mortality rate calculations on ringed birds with special reference to the Dunlin Calidris alpina Arkiv för Zoologi (Zoology files), Kungliga Svenska Vetenskapsakademien (The Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences) Serie 2 Band 13 21 1961 ] Millington, Richard (1994): A mystery Calidris at Cley. Birding World 7(2): 61-63. HTML excerpt [ Calidris alpina ] [ Calidris alpina ] [ External links ] Dunlin videos, photos &amp; sounds on the Internet Bird Collection Dunlin Species Account - Cornell Lab of Ornithology Dunlin Information and Photos - South Dakota Birds and Birding Dunlin - &apos;&apos;Calidris alpina&apos;&apos; - USGS Patuxent Bird Identification InfoCenter Ocean Wanderers : A putative hybrid White-rumped Sandpiper × Dunlin from the east coast of the USA. Retrieved 2006-OCT-11 Category:Arctic birds Category:Calidris Category:Erolia Category:Sandpipers Category:Birds of Europe Category:Birds of Iceland Category:Birds of Turkey Category:Birds of Western Australia Category:Birds of Azerbaijan Category:Birds of Pakistan Category:British Isles coastal fauna Category:Migratory birds (Eastern hemisphere) Category:Migratory birds (Western hemisphere) Category:Birds of Western Sahara ar:دريجة رهيز bg:Тъмногръд брегобегач br:Sourouc&apos;han boutin ca:Territ variant cs:Jespák obecný cy:Pibydd y Mawn da:Almindelig ryle de:Alpenstrandläufer et:Soorüdi es:Calidris alpina eo:Bunta kalidro eu:Txirri arrunt fo:Fjallmurra fr:Bécasseau variable fy:Bûnte Gril ga:Breacóg gl:Pilro común is:Lóuþræll it:Calidris alpina he:חופית אלפינית csb:Biegôcz lt:Juodkrūtis bėgikas hu:Havasi partfutó ms:Burung Kedidi Dunlin nl:Bonte strandloper ja:ハマシギ frr:Stönerk no:Myrsnipe nn:Myrsnipe pnb:ڈنلن pcd:Aloehéte éd mér pms:Calidris alpina pl:Biegus zmienny pt:Pilrito-comum rue:Алпскый писочник ru:Чернозобик fi:Suosirri sv:Kärrsnäppa tr:Kara karınlı kum kuşu uk:Побережник чорногрудий zh:黑腹滨鹬