[ Advanced Systems Format   ▲ ▲ ▲.asf.wma.wmv video/x-ms-asf, application/vnd.ms-asf http://www.iana.org/assignments/media-types/application/vnd.ms-asf &apos;ASF_&apos; com.microsoft.advanced-systems-format Microsoft Container format WMA, WMV, MPEG4 etc. 30 26 b2 75 ] Advanced Systems Format (formerly Advanced Streaming Format, Active Streaming Format) is Microsoft &apos;s proprietary digital audio / digital video container format, especially meant for streaming media. ASF is part of the Windows Media framework. [ Overview and features ] ASF is based on serialized objects which are essentially byte sequences identified by a GUID marker. The format does not specify how (i.e. with which codec ) the video or audio should be encoded; it just specifies the structure of the video/audio stream. This is similar to the function performed by the QuickTime, AVI, or Ogg container formats. One of the objectives of ASF was to support playback from digital media servers, HTTP server s, and local storage devices such as hard disk drive s. The most common file types contained within an ASF file are Windows Media Audio (WMA) and Windows Media Video (WMV). Note that the file extension abbreviations are different from the codecs which have the same name. The current version of Windows Media Encoder produces files with the extension.WMA (and MIME-type &apos;audio/x-ms-wma&apos;) and.WMV (MIME-type &apos;video/x-ms-asf&apos;). These files are identical to the old.ASF files but for their extension and MIME-type. According to Microsoft, the change in extensions was made to make it easier for an application to identify the content of a media file (see Q284094). Although this differentiation was introduced in 2003, to this date most webbrowsers (including the latest versions of Internet Explorer and Firefox) do not function as might be expected with the &apos;new&apos; extensions: even when a.wma or.wmv file is specifically encoded for progressive download, browsers still proceed to completely download the file before playing it. This can, however, be easily remedied by simply renaming the.wma or.wmv file to the old extension.asf. ASF files can also contain objects representing metadata, such as the artist, title, album and genre for an audio track, or the director of a video track, much like the ID3 tags of MP3 files. It supports scalable media types and stream prioritization; as such, it is a format optimized for streaming. The ASF container provides the framework for digital rights management in Windows Media Audio and Windows Media Video. An analysis of an older scheme used in WMA reveals that it is using a combination of elliptic curve cryptography key exchange, DES block cipher, a custom block cipher, RC4 stream cipher and the SHA-1 hashing function. ASF container-based media are sometimes still streamed on the internet either through the MMS protocol or the RTSP protocol. Mostly, however, they contain material encoded for &apos;progressive download&apos;, which can be distributed by any webserver and then offers the same advantages as streaming: the file starts playing as soon as a minimum number of bytes is received and the rest of the download continues in the background while one is watching or listening. [ Codecs ] Although the ASF container format can technically include any codec [ August 2011 ], Microsoft&apos;s encoding tools (including Windows Media Encoder and Windows Movie Maker ) produce ASF/WMA/WMV files using the DirectX Media Objects (DMO) framework. So far, third-party DMO-based codecs remain extremely rare. [ License ] The specification is downloadable from the Microsoft website { ASF Specification Download } and the format can be implemented under a license from Microsoft that however does not allow distribution of sources and is not compatible with open source licenses. The author of the free software project VirtualDub reported that a Microsoft employee informed him that his software violated a Microsoft patent regarding ASF playback. { Advogato: Microsoft patents ASF media file format, stops reverse engineering } Certain error-correcting techniques related to ASF are patented in the United States ( United States Patent 6,041,345 Levi, et al. March 21, 2000) by Microsoft. [ See also ] Advanced Stream Redirector (ASX) Comparison of container formats [ References ] [ 2 ] [ External links ] An Overview of Advanced Systems Format Overview of the ASF Format Library of Congress analysis of ASF format sustainability ASF Container Format - v2.0 (free available but unused) and v1.0 (reconstructed) MSDN How To Embed Windows Media Player in a HTML Web Page (For Webmasters) Creating A Windows Media Custom Experience (For Webmasters) Category:Internet Explorer Category:Container formats Category:Microsoft Windows multimedia technology Category:DRM systems ca:Advanced Systems Format da:Advanced Systems Format de:Advanced Streaming Format es:Advanced Streaming Format fr:Advanced Systems Format ko:능동 스트리밍 포맷 id:Advanced Systems Format it:Advanced Systems Format pam:Advanced Systems Format hu:Advanced Streaming Format nl:Advanced Systems Format ja:Advanced Systems Format pl:Advanced Systems Format ro:Advanced Systems Format ru:Advanced Systems Format fi:ASF tr:Advanced Streaming Format yo:Advanced Systems Format