[ September 2011 ] [ Zhao / Chao Zhao surname.jpg 200 Zhào, Chao ( Mandarin ) Chiu, Ziu 6 ( Cantonese ) Teo ( Hokkien ) Cho, Jo ( Korean ) Triệu ( Vietnamese ) Ḍjäu C ( Middle Chinese ) Name of a feudal state during the Zhou Dynasty China Chinese Cho, Triệu ] Zhao / Chao or Chiu ( [ Zhào Chao 赵 趙 ], [ Triệu ], [ 조 ] ) is a common Chinese family name, ranking as the 7th most common surname in Mainland China. Zhao is the first surname in the famous Hundred Family Surnames – the traditional list of all Chinese surnames – because it was the royal surname of the Song Dynasty (960–1279) when the list was compiled. Zhao is one of the most ancient of Chinese surnames, and its origins are partly shrouded in legend. During the reign of King Mu of Zhou (976/956 BC – 922/918 BC), an officer named Zaofu ( [ 造父 ] ) proved exceptionally adept at training horses and driving chariots and won the respect of King Mu. During a battle with the eastern state of Xu, a non-Chinese state which was resisting Zhou rule, Zaofu drove a chariot into the battle and escorted King Mu back to the Zhou capital. In gratitude, King Mu enfeoffed Zaofu as the lord of Zhao, a town in what is now Hongdong County, Shanxi Province, to be held by his descendants in perpetuity. Zaofu&apos;s descendants took Zhao as a surname to mark their prestigious association with the city. Records such as Sima Qian &apos;s Records of the Grand Historian say that Zaofu was a descendant of legendary kings Zhuanxu, Shaohao, and the Yellow Emperor. The town Zhao became part of the state of Jin during the Warring States Period, when the Zhou Dynasty began to collapse. In 403 BC, Jin split into three smaller states, one of which was the state of Zhao. The Zhao rulers were highly successful, and were one of the last major states conquered by the Qin Dynasty during its unification of China. As with all ancient Chinese surnames, the Zhao family was constantly added to by marriages, its bestowal upon commoners for meritorious deeds, and its adoption by non-Chinese peoples assimilated into Han Chinese culture. The Zhao name experienced a great revival after Zhao Kuangyin became the first emperor of the Song Dynasty in 960 AD, leading to 300 years of Zhao rule over China. Rarely, Zhao can denote the much less common family name Zhào (兆). [ Prominent people with the family name ] The royals of the State of Zhao The royals of Triệu Dynasty / Nanyue The royals of the Song Dynasty Zhao Ziyang ( traditional Chinese : 趙紫陽, simplified Chinese : 赵紫阳), Chinese politician Elaine L. Chao ( traditional Chinese : 趙小蘭), American politician, served as the 24th United States Secretary of Labor Rosalind Chao ( traditional Chinese : 趙家玲), American actress Yuen Ren Chao ( traditional Chinese : 趙元任), Chinese linguist Mark Chao ( traditional Chinese : 趙又廷), Taiwanese actor, singer and model Cecil Chao, Sze-Tsung ( traditional Chinese : 趙世曾), Hong Kong entrepreneur Peter Chao, Chinese-Canadian comedian on youtube Bondy Chiu ( traditional Chinese : 趙學而), Hong Kong singer and actress Angie Chiu ( traditional Chinese : 趙雅芝), Hong Kong actress, third runner up in the 1973 Miss Hong Kong pageant Bryan Chiu, retired Canadian professional football player; played Centre for the Montreal Alouettes in the CFL from 1997 to 2010 May Chiu, Canadian politician; first Chinese-born Québécoise to have run as a candidate for the Bloc Québécois party in Montreal, Quebec, Canada Baldwin Chiu ( traditional Chinese :趙保榮) as Only Won, Hip Hop Artist, Actor, Model, Martial Arts instructor John Cho, Korean-born American comedian Margaret Cho, American comedian Judy Chu ( traditional Chinese : 趙美心), American politician and educator Zhao Benshan ( traditional Chinese : 趙本山), comedian/actor/director Zhao Dan ( traditional Chinese : 趙丹), Chinese actor popular during the golden age of Chinese Cinema. Zhao Erfeng (warlord) Zhao Erxun (governor of Sichuan) Zhao Hongbo ( traditional Chinese : 趙宏博), a pairs figure skater Zhao Jingshen ( traditional Chinese : 趙景深), novelist. Zhao Jiping ( traditional Chinese : 趙季平), composer Zhao Mengfu ( traditional Chinese : 趙孟頫), calligrapher, descendant of Song Imperial Family Zhao Yong ( traditional Chinese : 趙雍), calligrapher, son of Zhao Mengfu, descendant of Song Imperial Family Zhao Yiguang ( traditional Chinese : 趙宧光), Literary figure and author during Ming dynasty, relative of Zhao Mengfu, descendant of Song Imperial Family Zhao Jun (writer), son of Zhao Yiguang, Literary figure during Ming dynasty, relative of Zhao Mengfu, descendant of Song Imperial Family Zhao Shawn ( traditional Chinese : 趙晟暘), telebroadcaster for &quot; Unami Tube &quot; Zhao Shuli ( traditional Chinese : 趙樹理), novelist Zhao Wei ( traditional Chinese : 趙薇, simplified Chinese : 赵薇), actress Zhao Wenzhuo ( traditional Chinese : 趙文卓), martial artist and actor Zhao Yabo (Adult entertainer) Zhao Yanlei, ( simplified Chinese : 赵燕雷), Chinese lawyer Zhao Yiman ( simplified Chinese : 赵一曼), Chinese freedom fighter Zhao Yongsheng, race walker Zhao Zilong ( traditional Chinese : 趙子龍), general during the era of Three Kingdoms. Zhao Zheng, royal bloodline. Zhao Zong-Yuan Chinese-Australian chess grandmaster Zhao juan [Vice president – Steel projects Dalian] Jackie Zhao A Chinese-American Ghost Hunter on the show The Othersiders Geer Zhao ( Mandopop singer ) [ External links ] Chinese Zhao surname history Category:Surnames Category:Chinese-language surnames gan:趙姓 nl:Zhao no:Zhao (navn) ru:Чжао (фамилия) vi:Triệu (họ) zh-yue:趙氏 zh:趙姓