Solomon Schechter Solomon Schechter ( Hebrew : שניאור זלמן שכטר; December 7, 1847 – November, 19 1915) was a Moldavia n -born Romania n and English rabbi, academic scholar, and educator, most famous for his roles as founder and President of the United Synagogue of America, President of the Jewish Theological Seminary of America, and architect of the American Conservative Jewish movement. [ Early life ] Born in Focşani to a Jewish Romanian family adhering to the Chabad Hasidic branch, he attended yeshiva s in Eastern Europe. Schechter received his early education from his father who was a shochet ( &quot; ritual slaughterer &quot; ). Reportedly, he learned to read Hebrew by age three, and by five mastered Chumash. He went to a yeshiva in Piatra Neamţ at age ten and at age thirteen studied with one of the major Talmud ic scholars, Rabbi Joseph Saul Nathanson of Lemberg. { Librarian&apos;s Lobby October 2000 Heroes of learning at home.earthlink.net } In his twenties he went to the Rabbinical College in Vienna, where he studied under the more modern Talmudic scholar Meir Friedmann, before in 1879 moving on to undertake further studies at the Berlin Hochschule für die Wissenschaft des Judentums and at the University of Berlin. Three years later he was invited to the UK, to be tutor of rabbinics under Claude Montefiore in London. [ Academic career ] In 1890, after the death of Solomon Marcus Schiller-Szinessy, he was appointed to the faculty at Cambridge University, serving as a lecturer in Talmud ics and reader in Rabbinics. [ SCCR892S Schechter, Salomon ] To this day, the students of the Cambridge University Jewish Society hold an annual Solomon Schechter Memorial Lecture. His greatest academic fame came from his excavation in 1896 of the papers of the Cairo Geniza, an extraordinary collection of over 100,000 pages of rare Hebrew religious manuscripts and medieval Jewish texts that were preserved at an Egypt ian synagogue. The find revolutionized the study of Medieval Judaism. Jacob Saphir was the first Jewish researcher to recognize the significance of the Cairo geniza, as well as the first to publicize the existence of the Midrash ha-Gadol, both later studied with great panache by Schechter. Schechter was alerted to the existence of the Geniza&apos;s papers in May 1896 by two Scottish sisters, Mrs. Lewis and Mrs. Gibson, who showed him some leaves from the Geniza that contained the Hebrew text of Sirach, which had for centuries only been known in Greek and Latin translation. { Soskice, Janet (2010) Sisters of Sinai. London: Vintage, 239 - 40 } Letters, written at Schechter&apos;s prompting, by Agnes Smith to The Athenaeum and The Academy quickly revealed the existence of another nine leaves of the same manuscript in the possession of Archibald Sayce at Oxford University. { Soskice, Janet (2010) Sisters of Sinai. London: Vintage, 241 - 2 } Schechter quickly found support for another expedition to the Cairo Geniza, and arrived there in December 1896 with an introduction from the Chief Rabbi, Hermann Adler, to the Chief Rabbi of Cairo, Aaron Raphael Ben Shim&apos;on. { Soskice, Janet (2010) Sisters of Sinai. London: Vintage, 246 } He carefully selected for the Cambridge University Library a trove three times the size of any other collection: this is now part of the Taylor-Schechter Collection. The find was instrumental in Schechter resolving a dispute with David Margoliouth as to the likely Hebrew language origins of Sirach. { Soskice, Janet (2010) Sisters of Sinai. London: Vintage, 240 - 41 } Charles Taylor took a great interest in Solomon Schechter&apos;s work in Cairo, and the genizah fragments presented to the University of Cambridge are known as the Taylor-Schechter Collection. { Taylor-Schechter: a Priceless Collection } He was joint editor with Schechter of The Wisdom of Ben Sira, 1899. He published separately Cairo Genizah Palimpsests, 1900. He became a Professor of Hebrew at University College London in 1899 and remained until 1902 when he moved to America and was replaced by Israel Abrahams. [ American Jewish community ] In 1902, traditional Jews reacting against the progress of the American Reform Judaism movement, which was trying to establish an authoritative &quot; synod &quot; of American rabbis, recruited Schechter to become President of the Jewish Theological Seminary of America (JTSA). Schechter served as the second President of the JTSA, from 1902 to 1915, during which time he founded the United Synagogue of America, later renamed as the United Synagogue of Conservative Judaism. [ Religious and cultural beliefs ] Schechter emphasized the centrality of Jewish law (Halakha) in Jewish life in a speech in his inaugural address as President of the JTSA in 1902: &quot; Judaism is not a religion which does not oppose itself to anything in particular. Judaism is opposed to any number of things and says distinctly &quot; thou shalt not. &quot; It permeates the whole of your life. It demands control over all of your actions, and interferes even with your menu. It sanctifies the seasons, and regulates your history, both in the past and in the future. Above all, it teaches that disobedience is the strength of sin. It insists upon the observance of both the spirit and of the letter; spirit without letter belongs to the species known to the mystics as &quot; nude souls &quot; nishmatim artilain, wandering about in the universe without balance and without consistency...In a word, Judaism is absolutely incompatible with the abandonment of the Torah. &quot; Schechter, on the other hand, believed in what he termed Catholic Israel. The basic idea being that Jewish law, Halacha, is formed and evolves based on the behavior of the people. This concept of modifying the law based on national consensus is an untraditional viewpoint. It is alleged that Shechter openly violated the prohibitions associated with traditional Shabbat observance. { American Hebrew 57:18 (6 September 1895), p.60 } Schechter was an early advocate of Zionism. He was the chairman of the committee that edited the Jewish Publication Society of America Version of the Hebrew Bible. [ Legacy ] Schechter&apos;s name is synonymous with the findings of the Cairo Geniza. He placed the JTSA on an institutional footing strong enough to endure for over a century. He became identified as the foremost personality of Conservative Judaism and is regarded as its founder. A network of Conservative Jewish day school s is named in his honor. There are several dozen Solomon Schechter Day Schools across the United States and Canada. [ Bibliography ] Schechter, Solomon (1896) Studies in Judaism. 3 vols. London: A. &amp; C. Black, 1896-1924 (Ser. III published by The Jewish Publication Society of America, Philadelphia PA) Schechter, Solomon (1909) Some Aspects of Rabbinic Theology London: A. and C. Black (Reissued by Schocken Books, New York, 1961; again by Jewish Lights, Woodstock, Vt., 1993: including the original preface of 1909 &amp; the introduction by Loius [sic] Finkelstein; new introduction by Neil Gilman [i.e. Gillman] ) [ References ] [ 2 ] [ Sources ] Fine, David J. (1997) Solomon Schechter and the Ambivalence of Jewish Wissenschaft in: Judaism (1997) p.  4-24 Gillman, Neil Conservative Judaism: the New Century. Behrman House Hoffman, Adina &amp; Cole, Peter (2011) Sacred Trash: the lost and found world of the Cairo Geniza Starr, David (2003) Catholic Israel: Solomon Schechter, Unity and Fragmentation in Modern Jewish History &quot; Ph.D. Dissertation, Columbia University [ External links ] [ lccn-n85-209449 ] Solomon Schechter, from Neil Gillman&apos;s book on Conservative Judaism Biography at the Jewish Virtual Library Louis Jacobs, From Cairo to Catholic Israel: Solomon Schechter, in The Jewish Religion: a Companion, OUP, 1995 Solomon Schechter Collection at the Jewish Theological Seminary of America Solomon Schechter School of Greater Boston AHRC Rylands Cairo Genizah Project Solomon Schechter School of Queens Solomon Schechter School of Westchester [ Schechter ] [ December 2010 ] [ Schechter, Solomon שניאור זלמן שכטר Rabbi and scholar December 7, 1847 Focşani, Romania November, 19 1915 ] Category:1847 births Category:1915 deaths Category:Romanian Jews Category:Romanian theologians Category:Romanian Conservative rabbis Category:Academics of University College London Category:Alumni of the University of Cambridge Category:19th-century rabbis Category:20th-century rabbis Category:English rabbis Category:American Conservative rabbis Category:English theologians Category:Jewish Theological Seminary of America people Category:Zionists Category:Jewish Egyptian history Category:British people of Romanian descent Category:American people of Romanian-Jewish descent Category:People from Focşani de:Solomon Schechter fr:Solomon Schechter he:שניאור זלמן שכטר it:Solomon Schechter ro:Solomon Schechter sv:Solomon Schechter yi:סאלאמאן שעכטער