[ Diaspora 200px Paperback, 5th Imp., 2003 Greg Egan Australia English Hard science fiction novel Gollancz September 1997 Print ( paperback ) 376 pp (PB edition) 0-7528-0925-3 39837889 ] Diaspora, a hard science fiction novel by the Australia n writer Greg Egan, first appeared in print in 1997. [ Plot introduction ] This novel&apos;s setting is a posthuman future, in which transhumanism long ago (during the mid 21st century) became the default philosophy embraced by the vast majority of human cultures. The novel began as a short story entitled &quot; Wang&apos;s Carpets &quot; which originally appeared in New Legends, a collection of short stories edited by Greg Bear (Legend, London, 1995). Egan later adapted and included &quot; Wang&apos;s Carpets &quot; as a chapter in the novel. An appended glossary explains many of the specialist terms in the novel. Egan invents several new theories of physics, beginning with Kozuch Theory, the dominant physics paradigm for nearly nine hundred years before the beginning of the novel. Kozuch Theory treats elementary particles as semi-point-like wormholes, whose properties can be explained entirely in terms of their geometries in six dimension s. Certain assumptions common to Egan&apos;s works inform the plot. Most of the characters choose a neutral gender; Keri Hulme &apos;s gender-neutral pronoun s &quot; ve &quot;, &quot; vis &quot;, and &quot; ver &quot; are used for them. [ The world of the novel ] By 2975 CE (Universal Time), the year in which the novel begins, humanity has &quot; speciated &quot; into three distinct groupings: fleshers, biological societies consisting of statics, the original, naturally-evolving race of Homo sapiens, and a wide variety of exuberant derivatives, who have modified their genes beyond the static baseline. These include enhancements such as disease-resistance, life-extension, intelligence-amplification, and the ability to allow selected transhuman s to thrive in new environments, such as the sea. There even exists a subculture (the dream apes) whose ancestors bred out the capacity for speech and some of the higher brain-functions, apparently in order to attain a primal innocence and rapport with nature. In contrast to 21st-century society prior to the novel&apos;s &quot; Introdus &quot; event, the vast profusion of qualitatively different types of fleshers has made any sort of global civilisation impossible. This divergence has prompted the development of a culture of &quot; Bridgers &quot; who modify their own minds to form a chain of intermediates between exuberant strains. gleisner robots, individual software -based intelligences housed inside artificial anthropoid, or flesher-shaped, physical bodies (from a design by a corporation named Gleisner Egan&apos;s short story &quot; Transition Dreams &quot; in the collection Luminous mentions the corporation ) who interact with the world in flesher-paced &quot; real time, &quot; a trait which they regard as important, as they consider the polis citizens too remote and solipsistic. The gleisners live in space, mostly in the asteroid belt, and in various other places in the Solar System; Egan implies that they long ago agreed to leave Earth to the fleshers to avoid conflict. They eventually implement a program of interstellar exploration using a fleet of 63 ships, targeting the nearest 21 stars. the citizens, Disembodied minds, sometimes referred to generally as infomorph s within the genre. intelligence as disembodied computer software running entirely within simulated reality -based communities known as polises. Polis in Greek means &quot; city / state &quot;. These represent the majority by far of &quot; humanity &quot; in the novel, followed in a distant second place by the gleisners. Together with vast networks of sensors, probes, drones and satellites throughout the Solar system, they collectively make up the Coalition of Polises, the backbone and bulk of human civilisation. They interact primarily in virtual environments called scapes, through the use of avatar s or icon s. The citizens of the Coalition view the gleisners and their colonial aspirations as puerile and ultimately futile, believing that only &quot; bacteria with spaceships.  .  . knowing no better and having no choice &quot; would attempt to deface (by means of mass colonisation) the galaxy, especially if virtual realities afford limitless possibilities at a small fraction of the total resource-consumption. Diaspora focuses in large part on the nature of life and intelligence in a post-human context, and questions the meaning of life and the meaning of desires. If, for instance, the meaning of human life and human desires is bound up with ancestral human biology ( &quot; to spread one&apos;s genes &quot; ), then what meaning do lives and desires have, and what serves as the basis of values when biology no longer forms a part of life? [ Plot summary ] Diaspora begins with a description of &quot; orphanogenesis &quot;, the birthing of a citizen without any ancestors (most citizens descend from fleshers uploaded at some point), and the subsequent upbringing of the newborn Yatima within Konishi polis. Yatima matures within a few real-time days, because citizens&apos; subjective time runs about 800 times as rapidly as flesher and gleisner time. Early on, Yatima and a friend, Inoshiro, use abandoned gleisner bodies to visit a Bridger colony near the ruins of Atlanta on Earth. Years later, the gleisner Karpal, using a gravitational-wave detector, determines that a binary neutron star system in the constellation of Lacerta has collapsed, releasing a huge burst of energy. Previous predictions portrayed the system&apos;s stable orbit as likely to last for another seven million years. By analysing irregularities in the orbit, Karpal discovers that the devastating burst of energy will reach Earth within the next four days. Yatima and Inoshiro return to Earth to urge the fleshers — gathered in a conference — either to migrate to the polises or at least to shelter themselves. Many fleshers reject this advice, or fail fully to appreciate its urgency quickly enough. Stirred up by a paranoid Static diplomat, many fleshers suspect that Yatima and Inoshiro have come to trick or coerce them into &quot; Introdus &quot;, or mass-migration into the polises, involving masses of virus-sized nanomachine s which dismantle a human body and record the brain&apos;s information states as it is chemically converted into a crystalline computer. The gamma ray burst reaches Earth shortly after the conference, destroying the atmosphere and causing a mass extinction. The gleisners and the Coalition of Polises survive the burst, thanks to cosmic radiation hardening. Over the next few years, Yatima and other citizens and gleisners attempt to rescue any surviving fleshers from slow suffocation, starvation, or poisoning by offering to upload them into the polises. The novel&apos;s title itself refers to a quest undertaken by most of the inhabitants of Carter-Zimmerman ( &quot; C-Z &quot; ), a polis devoted to physics and understanding the cosmos, along with volunteers from throughout the Coalition of Polises. The Diaspora consists of a collection of one thousand clones (digital copies) of C-Z polis, deployed toward stars in all directions in the hope of gathering as much data as possible in order to revise the long-held classical understanding of Kozuch Theory, which had failed to predict the Lacerta event. The bulk of the novel follows this expedition, rotating back and forth between different cloned instances of the same cast of main characters as different C-Z clones make discoveries along the way, relaying information to one another over hundreds of light years – and finally between universes. [ Characters ] [ Internet Living Swahili Dictionary yatima http://www.kamusiproject.org/en/lookup/sw?Word%3Dyatima 2009-03-06 The Kamusi Project ] Yatima The word yatima in Swahili means &quot; orphan &quot;; see appears as an Orphan, a being formed by the Konishi polis conceptory rather than by a parent or parents. A central character in the novel, ve usually takes the iconic form of an African herdsman in a purple robe. Yatima exhibits a deep love of mathematics and a desire to explore the unknown. Blanca, who habitually uses the icon of a featureless black silhouette, also inhabits the Konishi polis. One of the first three people that Yatima meets and a physicist and scape-architect, Blanca has a reputation as an acknowledged expert on Kozuch Theory throughout the Coalition of Polises. Inoshiro, another of Yatima&apos;s earliest friends, uses an icon featuring metallic, pewter-grey skin. A native of Konishi but a frequenter of Ashton-Laval, a polis of great artistic merit, ve proudly considers verself delinquent. Inoshiro frequently attempts to attract Yatima away from philosophical Konishi and into more aesthetic and avant-garde pursuits. Inoshiro originates the idea of visiting the fleshers of Atlanta in ancient gleisner bodies. Gabriel, Yatima&apos;s third early friend, has an icon covered in short, golden-brown fur. Gabriel, Blanca&apos;s lover and another great physicist, differs from most polis citizens in having chosen for himself a specific (though non-functional) gender, a trait considered eccentric and perhaps perverted by many citizens of the Coalition. Karpal, a gleisner astronomer who lives on the surface of the Moon, first discovers the collapse of Lac G-1 in Lacerta. He later leaves his robotic body and gleisner society to transmigrate to the Carter-Zimmerman polis, seeking a more profound understanding of physics, unavailable to creatures whose minds remain programmed to think of things in terms of their bodies. Orlando Venetti, originally a leader of the Bridger colony of Atlanta; he and his mate Liana Zabini first welcome Inoshiro and Yatima upon their arrival in gleisner form. In the Lacerta Event, Liana dies but the visitors from Konishi rescue Orlando and bring him into the polis; he joins the Diaspora, and thanks to his Bridger training he makes the first interactive contact with an alien intelligence. Before joining the Diaspora he creates a son, Paolo, who ultimately joins Yatima in exploring higher universes on the trail of the &quot; Transmuters &quot;. Radiya is Yatima&apos;s first mentor in abstract mathematics and in exploration of the &quot; Truth Mines &quot;, Konishi’s metaphoric representation of the world of mathematical theorems. Vis icon is a fleshless skeleton made of twigs and branches, with a skull carved from a knotted stump. Hermann, an extremely eccentric member of the Diaspora, often appears as a segmented worm with six flesher-shaped feet attached to elbow-jointed legs, based on the curl-up from the work of M. C. Escher. Very old (a member of the original 21st-century Introdus), Hermann describes verself as vis own great-great-grandchild because ve has reinvented vis own personality so many times during vis long life. The Star Puppies, a group of Carter-Zimmerman citizens, elect to stay conscious, in real time, for the duration of their spaceflight in the Diaspora (most others enter a state of suspension). The Puppies take the form of space-evolved creatures dwelling in a scape representing the hull of the spacecraft, employing personality outlooks (software which accentuates specific moods &amp; values) to ensure they feel constant joy in, and at, the universe around them and retain their sanity. [ The Polises ] Humanity began transferring itself into the polises (the Introdus) in the late 21st century UT. Many polises exist, though the novel mentions only a few. Though the author does not go into any great detail about them in a physical sense, they apparently exist as hardware-based supercomputers of unknown size and computational ability, all probably hidden in safe places. Konishi polis, at least, lies buried deep beneath the Siberian tundra. Each polis has its own unique character, encapsulated in a &quot; charter &quot; which defines its goals, philosophies, and attitudes to other polises and to the external world. &quot; Society &quot; expects citizens to heed the charter of the polis they &quot; live &quot; in; should they begin to disagree with the charter, they can always migrate to a polis which appears more amenable to them. The most prominent differences between the various polises, at least in the novel, involves their attitudes toward the physical world. Polis societies range from those who wish to experience the real world of normal time and space to the wholly solipsistic who live their entire lives in esoteric, isolated virtuality. The citizens of Konishi polis seem to concern themselves mostly with abstract mathematics and esoteric philosophical pursuits, and generally show little interest in the physical world. They use visual icons for social purposes, but regard simulated physical interaction as a violation of individual autonomy. After the Lacerta Event, Yatima emigrates from Konishi to Carter-Zimmerman polis, which rejects the solipsism exemplified by Konishi and embraces the study of the physical universe as of paramount importance. Given the Lacerta Event, which suggests that the universe has the capability of unleashing unknown extreme dangers, Yatima has begun to share this viewpoint. [ Polis time, delta, and perception ] For internal dating and time standards the polises use CST (Coalition Standard Time), measured in tau elapsed since the adoption of the system on January 1, 2065 (UT). The novel begins at CST date 23 387 025 000 000. CST defines one tau as the amount of time in which a polis citizen can experience the passage of one second of subjective time; this elastic value changes with improvements in polis hardware. At the period of the novel a polis citizen&apos;s mind can operate at a maximum speed of about eight hundred times that of a flesher&apos;s mind, so 1 tau equals approximately 1/800 sec. Nothing compels citizens to experience time at such a high rate; they can equally choose to &quot; rush &quot;, meaning to experience consciousness at a speed slower than the polis hardware can maintain. Hence citizens could experience consciousness at the same speed as a human flesher would, or slower, or even freeze their conscious state for a set time or until a previously determined event occurs. Egan suggests that some citizens have opted to experience consciousness so slowly that they can witness continental drift and geological erosion. The polises measure distance, another arbitrary value within their virtual scapes, in &quot; delta &quot;, which Egan does not fully explain, although the glossary indicates that citizen&apos;s icons are generally about 2 delta high. Almost all polis citizens, except for those who specifically elect otherwise, experience the world through two sensory modalities: Linear and Gestalt, which Egan describes as distant descendants of hearing and seeing, respectively. Linear conveys information quantitatively, as a string or strings of information formulated with a language hardwired into the mind of almost all Citizens. Citizens may &quot; speak &quot; to one another in Linear by sending streams of data back and forth, from mind to mind — either private conversations carried on between a specific subset of intended participants, or public announcements accessible to all involved in a conversation or otherwise &quot; listening in &quot;. Gestalt conveys information qualitatively, and data sent or received about anything arrives all at once for interpretation by the mind of the Citizen in all its aspects simultaneously, resulting in an experience of immediacy. A citizen need not consciously consider the information sent (as in Linear): Gestalt operates rather entirely or almost entirely subconsciously. Citizens use Gestalt to create icons or for themselves — &quot; visual &quot; representations within Scapes (Gestalt &quot; areas &quot; or &quot; spaces &quot; ). Citizens also use Gestalt to convey Tags — packages of information described as like an odour or essence, which any other Citizens within a range of several delta (or who happen to &quot; read &quot; for specific Tags) can gather. Each Citizen has a unique Tag which identifies them as a particular person, regardless of their other appearances, and citizens may emit Tags for other purposes as well, as when Citizens need to convey and understand arbitrary information instantly. Early in the novel, for instance, Yatima learns about an asteroid in the real world by reading its tags subconsciously, which inform ver instinctively about its properties such as mass, velocity, rotation, composition, emission spectra, and other such data discernible to the Coalition&apos;s satellite network. Later on, however, on Earth, when ve and Inoshiro inhabit derelict Gleisner bodies, Yatima must remind verself that Fleshers are real people, even though they lack tags identifying themselves as such. [ Editions ] [ English editions ] September 1997: Hardback, ISBN 1-85798-438-2 (UK edition), Publisher: Gollancz, 320 pages September 1997: Paperback, ISBN 1-85798-439-0 (UK edition), Publisher: Gollancz 1997: Hardback, Cover of ISBN B000GX6OQU, Publisher: Orion February 1998: Hardback, ISBN 0-06-105281-7 (USA edition), Publisher: Eos July 1998: Paperback, ISBN 0-7528-0925-3 (UK edition), Publisher: Gollancz April 1999: Unbound, ISBN 0-606-18687-5 (USA edition), Publisher: Demco Media November 1999: Mass Market Paperback, ISBN 0-06-105798-3 (USA edition), Publisher: Eos [ Translations ] 1999: Boukoumanis Editions, Athens, Translated by Christodoulos Litharis (Greek translation) February 2000: Wilhelm Heyne Verlag, Munich, ISBN 3-453-16181-5 (pb), translated by Bernhard Kempen (German translation) 2003: Mondadori/Urania, Milan, ISSN 1120-5288 / Number 1460 (pb periodical), translated by Riccardo Valla (Italian translation) 2005: Hayakawa, Tokyo, ISBN 4-15-011531-1 (pb), translated by Makoto Yamagishi (Japanese translation) April 2009: La casa del libro, Granada, Spain ISBN 978-84-96013-52-0 (Spanish of Spain, Europe), Publisher: Grupo Editorial AJEC [ See also ] [ Novels ] Permutation City The Planck Dive [ References ] [ External links ] [ 1399 Diaspora ] Greg Egan&apos;s homepage &apos;&apos;Orphanogenesis&apos;&apos;, the first chapter of the novel, available for free download [ Reviews ] Infinity Plus Mathematical Fiction SF Site SF Reader Category:Novels by Greg Egan Category:Virtual reality in fiction Category:Transhumanist books Category:1997 novels Category:Australian science fiction novels Category:Mathematics fiction books Category:1990s science fiction novels cs:Diaspora (román) it:Diaspora (romanzo)