[ November 2007 ] { Ceuta, } { Melilla and } { Isla de Alborán. } The plazas de soberanía ( [ ˈplaθaz ðe soβeɾaˈni.a ], literally &quot; places of sovereignty &quot; ) are the current Spanish sovereign territories in continental North Africa bordering Morocco. The name refers to the fact that these territories have been a part of Spain since the formation of the modern Spanish State (1492-1556), to distinguish them from 19th and 20th Century colonialism. They are a part of Spain in all respects, and therefore also a part of the European Union and the Schengen Area. Historically, a distinction was made between the so-called major sovereign territories, comprising the cities of Ceuta and Melilla, and the minor sovereign territories, referring to a number of smaller enclaves and islands along the coast. In the present, the term refers mainly to the latter. [ History ] 19th-century Spanish map showing the &apos;&apos;plazas de soberanía&apos;&apos; Following the conquest of Al-Andalus, forces of the Castilian (Spanish) and Portuguese kingdoms conquered and maintained numerous posts in North Africa for trade and as a defence against piracy. In 1481 the Papal bull Æterni regis had granted all land south of the Canary Islands to Portugal. Only this archipelago and the possessions of Santa Cruz de la Mar Pequeña (1476–1524), Melilla ( conquered by Pedro de Estopiñán in 1497), Villa Cisneros (founded in 1502 in current Western Sahara ), Mazalquivir (1505), Peñón de Vélez de la Gomera (1508), Oran (1509–1790), Algiers (1510–1529), Bugia (1510–1554), Tripoli (1511–1551), Tunis (1535–1569) and Ceuta (ceded by Portugal in 1668) remained as Spanish territory in Africa. In 1848, Spanish troops conquered the Islas Chafarinas. In the late 19th Century, after the so-called Scramble for Africa, most of the African continent was under European colonial control. The Treaty of Fez (signed on March 30, 1912) made most of Morocco a protectorate of France, while Spain assumed the role of protecting power over the northern part, Spanish Morocco. When Spain relinquished its protectorate, and recognized Morocco&apos;s independence in 1956, it did not give up these minor territories, since Spain had held them well before the establishment of its protectorate. On July 11, 2002, Morocco stationed six navy cadets on Isla Perejil to tackle illegal immigration which was at the time a source of complaint by Spain. The Spanish Armed Forces responded by launching a military operation code-named Operation Romeo-Sierra. The attack was carried out by Spanish commandos of Grupo de Operaciones Especiales. The Spanish Navy and Spanish Air Force provided support, the six Moroccan navy cadets did not offer any resistance and were captured and evicted from the island, which has since been evacuated by both countries. [ Physical geography ] { Peñón de Vélez de la Gomera, seen from the Moroccan coast. } There are historically three plazas de soberanía: Isla Congreso Isla del Rey Isla Isabel II { Peñón de Alhucemas (which also includes, Isla de Mar and Isla de Tierra) } { Peñón de Vélez de la Gomera. } Apart from those, Isla Perejil, a small uninhabited islet close to Ceuta that was the subject of a confrontation with Morocco in 2002, has been lately defined [ March 2009 ] as an extra plaza de soberanía. It is not a plaza de soberanía in itself but, rather, no-man&apos;s land. [ March 2009 ] The Isla de Alborán, another small island in the western Mediterranean, about 50 kilometres from the Moroccan coast and 90 kilometres from Spain, is attached to the municipality of Almería on the European continent. [ Political geography ] The plazas de soberanía are small islands and peninsulas on the coast of Morocco which have no civilian population. They are guarded by military garrisons and administered directly by the Spanish central government. As part of Spain, they are also part of the European Union, and their currency is the euro. [ Claimants ] Morocco claims sovereignty over the Spanish North African territories, plus the autonomous cities of Ceuta and Melilla. [ See also ] Spanish Africa Spanish North Africa Spanish Protectorate of Morocco List of Spanish Colonial Wars in Morocco [ References ] [ collapsed ] [ Spain ] Category:Spanish Africa Category:Subdivisions of Spain Category:Mediterranean Category:Territorial disputes of Spain Category:Territorial disputes of Morocco ar:بلاثاس دي سوبيرانیا zh-min-nan:Chú-koân só͘-chāi bs:Plaza de soberanía br:Plaza de soberanía ca:Possessions espanyoles al Nord d&apos;Àfrica cs:Španělské severoafrické državy da:Plazas de soberanía de:Plaza de soberanía es:Plazas de soberanía eu:Afrika iparraldeko espainiar subiranotasuneko lurrak fa:پلاساس د سبرانیا fr:Plazas de soberanía gl:Praza de soberanía ko:플라사스 데 소베라니아 hi:स्पेन-नियंत्रित उत्तर अफ़्रीकी क्षेत्र hr:Plazas de soberanía id:Plaza de soberanía zu:Plazas de soberanía it:Plazas de soberanía ka:ესპანეთის სუვერენული ტერიტორიები hu:Plaza de soberanía nl:Plazas de soberanía ja:プラサス・デ・ソベラニア no:Plazas de soberanía pl:Hiszpańskie posiadłości w Afryce Północnej pt:Possessões espanholas ro:Plaza de soberanía ru:Суверенные территории Испании sr:Шпанске суверене територије su:Plazas de soberanía fi:Espanjan alueet Pohjois-Afrikassa sv:Plazas de soberanía tl:Plaza de soberanía uk:Суверенні території Іспанії vec:Plaza de soberanía vi:Plazas de soberanía war:Plaza de soberanía yo:Plazas de soberanía zh:西属主权地