Sir Thomas Shirley (1564 – c. 1634) was an English soldier, adventurer and politician who sat in the House of Commons at various times between 1584 and 1622. His financial difficulties drove him into privateering which culminated in his capture by the Turks and later imprisonment in the Tower of London. [ Early life ] Shirley was the eldest son of Sir Thomas Shirley of Wiston, Sussex, and his wife Anne Kempe, daughter of Sir Thomas Kempe of Ollantighe in Wye, Kent. He matriulated at Hart Hall, Oxford in 1579, but left the university without taking a degree. [ Shirley, Thomas ] In 1584 he was elected Member of Parliament for Steyning. { History of Parliament Online - Thomas Shirley } He went on military service with his father and brother in Low Countries in 1585, and later saw some in Ireland. He was knighted at Kilkenny in Ireland by the lord deputy, Sir William Fitz-William, on 26 October 1589. { Knights of England } Shirley later came to the court. In the summer of 1591 he made a secret marriage to one of Queen Elizabeth &apos;s maids of honour and when the queen heard of it, she promptly committed him to the Marshalsea Prison. He remained in prison till the spring of 1592. In 1593 he was elected MP for Steyning again. In the same year he saw service with the rank of captain in the Low Countries again. [ Privateering ] Shirley was beginning to suffer from hopeless embarrassment because of his father&apos;s increasing financial difficulties. In order to secure a livelihood, he decided to fit out a privateering expedition to attack Spanish merchandise. He handed over his company at Flushing to Sir Thomas Vavasour, a relation of his wife, and in the summer of 1598 sailed into the English Channel, and seized four ‘hulks’ of Lübeck which were reputed to be carrying Spanish goods. He may have made some of his attacks with the Queen’s ship Foresight, which he commanded in 1599. The costs and returns were high. A ship that Shirley captured while returning from San Domingo laden with sugar, was valued at £4,700. In April 1600, Shirley offered the Earl of Nottingham £600 for his tenth share in two ships which he brought into Plymouth and said he had already paid £2,000 for ‘the company’s thirds’. In October 1600 Shirley was brought before the Admiralty court for seizing a ship from Hamburg which had a cargo belonging to some Dutch merchants and Lord Cobham had to intervene on his behalf. He was also coming under attack from his creditors for in July 1600 some supporters of Sir Richard Weston broke into his father&apos;s house at Blackfriars and threatened the Shirleys, father and son, demanding payment. In 1601 his father required the borough seat of Steyning. Shirley was elected MP for both Bramber and Hastings and chose to sit for Hastings. In 1602 he renewed his privateering adventures, and pillaged ‘two poor hamlets of two dozen houses in Portugal.’ At the end of 1602 Shirley equipped two ships for a more ambitious adventure in the Levant where he aimed to strike a blow against the Turks. He was given encouragement by the Duke of Tuscany at Florence. However, he made an imprudent descent on the island of Kea on 15 Jan. 1603 and was captured by the Turks. He was transferred to Negropont on 20 March, and on 25 July 1603 he was carried a close prisoner to Constantinople. When news of his misfortunes reached England, James I appealed to the government of the sultan to release him. The English ambassador to the Porte, Henry Lello, used every effort on his behalf, and finally he was released on 6 December 1605, after eleven hundred dollars had been paid to his gaolers. He immediately went to Naples, where he was described by Toby Mathew, on 8 August 1606, as living there ‘like a gallant.’ At the end of 1606 he returned to England. Shirley was imprisoned in the Tower of London in September 1607 on a charge of illegal interference with the operations of the Levant Company. It was said that he had &quot; overbusied himself with the traffic of Constantinople, to have brought it to Venice and to the Florentine territories. &quot; In August 1611 he was confined in the king&apos;s bench as an insolvent debtor. The death of his father next year, and his second marriage greatly increased his difficulties. Wiston, which had fallen into ruins, was sold, but he was elected MP for Steyning in 1614, and 1621. Shirley is said to have retired subsequently to the Isle of Wight, and to have died there about 1630. [ Family ] Shirley married firstly Frances Vavasour, daughter of Henry Vavasour of Copmanthorpe, and had three sons and four daughters. Henry the second son, was the dramatist who was murdered in London on October 31, 1627. The only surviving son Thomas was baptised at West Clandon, Surrey, on 30 June 1597, was knighted in 1645 by Charles I at Oxford, was alive in 1664, and was father of Thomas Sherley [q. v.], the physician. Shirley married secondly at Deptford on 2 December 1617, a widow, Judith Taylor, daughter of William Bennet of London, by whom he had five sons and six daughters. Sir Anthony Shirley, and Sir Robert were his younger brothers. [ See also ] García de Silva Figueroa [ References ] [ en ] [ Member of Parliament for Steyning John Cowper Richard Pellatt Pexall Brocas 1584 Thomas Bishop Henry Shelley ] [ Member of Parliament for Steyning Thomas Crompton Henry Apsley Sir Walter Waller 1593 John Shurley Thomas Shirley III ] [ Member of Parliament for Bramber Nicholas Trott William Comber Henry Bowyer 1601 Henry Lok Henry Bowyer ] [ Member of Parliament for Hastings Richard Lyffe Edmund Pelham Richard Lyffe 1601 Sir Edward Hales Sir George Carew ] [ Member of Parliament for Steyning Sir Thomas Bishopp Sir Thomas Shirley Edward Fraunceys 1614-1622 Sir Thomas Farnfold Edward Fraunceys ] [ Shirley, Thomas 1564 ] Category:1564 births Category:1630s deaths Category:People of the Tudor period Category:People of Elizabethan Ireland Category:Members of the Parliament of England (pre-1707) Category:Alumni of Hart Hall, Oxford Category:Levant Company Category:English adventurers Category:English soldiers Category:16th-century English people Category:17th-century English people Category:Prisoners in the Tower of London