[ the group of islands west of Greece the administrative unit Ionian Islands (region) the ancient region in western Anatolia Ionia ] [ September 2011 ] The Ionian islands. The Ionian Islands ( Modern Greek : Ιόνια νησιά, Ionia nisia; Ancient Greek, Katharevousa : Ἰόνιοι Νῆσοι, Ionioi Nēsoi; [ Isole Ionie ] ) are a group of islands in Greece. They are traditionally called the Heptanese, i.e. &quot; the Seven Islands &quot; ( [ grc Ἑπτάνησα ], Heptanēsa, or [ grc Ἑπτάνησος ], Heptanēsos; [ Eptaneso ] ), but the group includes many smaller islands as well as the seven principal ones. [ Geography ] The seven are, from north to south: Kerkyra (Κέρκυρα) usually known as Corfu in English Paxi (Παξοί) also known as Paxos in English Lefkada (Λευκάδα) also known as Lefkas in English Ithaki (Ιθάκη) usually known as Ithaca in English Kefalonia (Κεφαλλονιά) often known as Kefalonia, Cephalonia and Kefallinia in English Zakynthos (Ζάκυνθος) sometimes known as Zante in English Kythira (Κύθηρα) sometimes known as Cerigo in English The six northern islands are off the west coast of Greece, in the Ionian Sea. The seventh island, Kythira, is off the southern tip of the Peloponnese, the southern part of the Greek mainland. Kythira is not part of the region of the Ionian Islands, as it is included in the region of Attica. [ Etymology ] { In } { Ancient Greek the adjective Ionios ( } [ grc Ἰόνιος ] { ) was used as an epithet for the sea between Epirus and Italy in which the Ionian Islands are found because } { Io swam across it. LSJ, A Greek-English Lexicon s.v. Ἰόνιος. } { Latin transliteration, as well as } { Modern Greek pronunciation, may suggest that the Ionian Sea and Islands are somehow related to } { Ionia, an Anatolian region; in fact the Ionian Sea and Ionian Islands are spelled in Greek with an } { omicron (Ιόνια), whereas Ionia has an } { omega (Ιωνία). In Modern Greek this is purely a spelling distinction, but the different pronunciations in Ancient Greek would have eliminated the risk of confusion between the two areas. Furthermore, Ionian is accented on the } { antepenult ( } [ iˈoɲa IPA ] { ), and } { Ionia on the } { penult ( } [ ioˈnia IPA ] { ); also the proper adjective for } { Ionia is } { Ionic, not Ionian. } The islands themselves are known by a rather confusing variety of names. During the centuries of rule by Venice, they acquired Venetian names, by which some of them are still known in English (and in Italian ). Kerkyra was known as Corfù, Ithaki as Val di Compare, Kythera as Cerigo, Lefkada as Santa Maura and Zakynthos as Zante. A variety of spellings are used for the Greek names of the islands, particularly in historical writing. Kefallonia is often spelled as Cephallenia or Cephalonia, Ithaki as Ithaca, Kerkyra as Corcyra, Kythera as Cythera, Lefkada as Leucas or Leucada and Zakynthos as Zacynthus or Zante. Older or variant Greek forms are sometimes also used: Kefallinia for Kefallonia and Paxos or Paxoi for Paxi. [ History ] The islands were settled by Greeks at an early date, possibly as early as 1200 BC, and certainly by the 9th century BC. The early Eretrian settlement at Kerkyra was displaced by colonists from Corinth in 734 BC. The islands were mostly a backwater during Ancient Greek times and played little part in Greek politics. The one exception was the conflict between Kerkyra and its mother-City Corinth in 434 BC, which brought intervention from Athens and triggered the Peloponnesian War. Ithaca was the name of the island home of Odysseus in the epic Ancient Greek poem the Odyssey by Homer. Attempts have been made to identify Ithaki with ancient Ithaca, but the geography of the real island cannot be made to fit Homer&apos;s description but archeological investigations have revealed interesting findings in both Kefalonia and Ithaca. [ Roman and Byzantine rule ] [ Cephallenia (theme) ] By the 4th century BC, most of the islands, were absorbed into the empire of Macedon. Some remained under the control of the Macedonian Kingdom and until 146 BC, when the Greek peninsula was gradually annexed by Rome. After 400 years of peaceful Roman rule, the islands passed to the Eastern Roman or Byzantine Empire. Under Byzantine rule, from the mid-8th century, they formed the theme of Cephallenia. The islands were a frequent target of Saracen raids and from the late 11th century, saw a number of Norman and Italian attacks. Most of the islands fell to William II of Sicily in 1185. Although Corfu and Lefkas remained under Byzantine control, Kefallonia and Zakynthos became the County palatine of Cephalonia and Zakynthos until 1357, when this entity was merged with Lefkada and Ithaki to become the Duchy of Leucadia under French and Italian dukes. Corfu, Paxi and Kythera were taken by the Venetians in 1204, after the dissolution of the Byzantine Empire by the Fourth Crusade. These became important overseas colonies of the Republic and were used as way-stations for their maritime trade with the Levant. [ Venetian rule ] [ Ionian Islands under Venetian rule ] { Lion of St. Mark, symbol of the } { Venetian Republic, at the New Fortress of } { Corfu, the longest-held of Venice&apos;s } { overseas possessions. } From 1204, the Republic of Venice controlled Corfu and slowly all the Ionian islands fell under Venetian rule. In the 15th century, the Ottomans conquered most of Greece, but their attempts at conquering the islands were largely unsuccessful. Zakynthos passed permanently to Venice in 1482, Kefallonia and Ithaki in 1483, Lefkada in 1502. Kythera had been Venetian since 1393. The islands thus became the only part of the Greek-speaking world to escape Ottoman rule, which gave them both a unity and an importance in Greek history they would otherwise not have had. Corfu was the only Greek island never conquered by the Turks. Under Venetian rule, many of the upper classes spoke Italian (or Venetian in some cases) and converted to Roman Catholicism, but the mass of people remained Greek ethnically, linguistically, and religiously. In the 18th century, a Greek national independence movement began to emerge, and the free status of the Ionian islands made them the natural base for exiled Greek intellectuals, freedom fighters and foreign sympathisers. The islands became more self-consciously Greek as the 19th century, the century of romantic nationalism, neared. [ Napoleonic era ] [ Septinsular Republic ] [ French departments of Greece ] In 1797, however, Napoléon Bonaparte conquered Venice, and by the Treaty of Campo Formio the islanders found themselves under French rule, the islands being organised as the départments Mer-Égée, Ithaque and Corcyre. In 1798, the Russian Admiral Ushakov evicted the French, and established the Septinsular Republic under joint Russo-Ottoman protection—the first time Greeks had had even limited self‐government since the fall of Constantinople in 1453. However, in 1807, they were ceded again to the French in the Treaty of Tilsit and occupied by the French Empire. [ British rule ] [ United States of the Ionian Islands ] Flag of British Ionian Islands. In 1809, the British defeated the French fleet in Zakynthos (October 2, 1809) captured Kefallonia, Kythera and Zakynthos, and took Lefkada in 1810. The French held out in Kerkyra until 1814. The Treaty of Paris in 1815 turned the islands into the &quot; United States of the Ionian Islands &quot; under British protection (November 5, 1815). In January 1817, the British granted the islands a new constitution. The islanders elected an Assembly of 40 members, who advised the British High Commissioner. The British greatly improved the islands&apos; communications, and introduced modern education and justice systems. The islanders welcomed most of these reforms, and took up afternoon tea, cricket and other English pastimes. Once Greek independence was established after 1830, however, the islanders began to resent foreign rule and to press for enosis - union with Greece. The British statesman William Ewart Gladstone toured the islands and recommended that they be given to Greece. The British government resisted, since like the Venetians they found the islands made useful naval bases. They also regarded the German-born king of Greece, King Otto, as unfriendly to Britain. However, in 1862, Otto was deposed and a pro-British king, George I, was installed. [ Greek rule ] In 1862, Britain decided to transfer the islands to Greece, as a gesture of support intended to bolster the new king&apos;s popularity. On May 2, 1864, the British departed and the islands became three provinces of the Kingdom of Greece though Britain retained the use of the port of Corfu. Prince Philippos of Greece and Denmark was born in Corfu in 1921 and grew up to become Britain&apos;s Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh. [ World War II ] [ Axis Occupation of Greece ] In 1941, when Axis forces occupied Greece, the Ionian Islands (except Kythera) were handed over to the Italians, who in their three years of rule attempted to Italianize the population of Corfu (as has happened with the Corfiot Italians ). In 1943, the Germans replaced the Italians, and deported the centuries-old Jew ish community of Corfu to their deaths. By 1944, most of the islands were under the control of the EAM / ELAS resistance movement, and they have remained a stronghold of left-wing sentiment ever since. [ 1953 earthquake ] The islands were struck by an especially powerful earthquake, of 7.1 magnitude, on August 12, 1953. Building damage was extensive and the southern islands of Kefalonia and Zakynthos were practically levelled. The islands were reconstructed from the ground up over the following years, under a strict building code. The code has proven extremely effective, as many earthquakes since that time have caused no damage to new buildings. [ Today ] Today, all the islands are part of the Greek region of the Ionian Islands (Ionioi Nisoi), except Kythera, which is part of the region of Attica. Kerkyra has a population of 113,479 (including Paxoi), Zakynthos 38,680, Kefallonia 39,579 (including Ithaca), Lefkada 22,536, Ithaki 3,052, Kythera 3,000 and Paxi 2,438. In recent decades, the islands have lost much of their population through emigration and the decline of their traditional industries, fishing and marginal agriculture. Today, their major industry is tourism. Specifically Kerkyra, with its harbour, scenery and wealth of ruins and castles, is a favourite stopping place for cruise liners. British tourists in particular are attracted through having read Gerald Durrell &apos;s evocative book My Family and Other Animals (1956), which describes his childhood on Kerkyra in the 1930s. The novel and movie Captain Corelli&apos;s Mandolin are set in Kefallonia. [ Major communities ] Argostóli (Αργοστόλι), in Kefalonia Kérkyra (Κέρκυρα), in Corfu Lefkáda (Λευκάδα), in Lefkada Lixouri (Ληξούρι), in Kefalonia Zákynthos (Ζάκυνθος), in Zakynthos [ See also ] Homer&apos;s Ithaca [ External links ] Ionian Islands The Official website of the Greek National Tourism Organisation [ References ] [ 38 30 N 20 30 E region:GR_type:isle title ] Category:NUTS 2 statistical regions of the European Union ar:الجزر الأيونية (إقليم) be:Іанічныя астравы bg:Йонийски острови ca:Illes Jòniques cs:Iónské ostrovy cy:Ynysoedd Ionaidd da:Ioniske Øer de:Ionische Inseln et:Joonia saared el:Επτάνησα es:Islas Jónicas eo:Ioniaj insuloj fo:Jónaoyggjar fr:Îles Ioniennes ko:이오니아 제도 hr:Jonski otoci id:Kepulauan Ionia it:Isole Ionie he:האיים היוניים jv:Kapuloan Ionia ka:იონიის კუნძულები la:Insulae Ioniae li:Ionische Eilen lmo:Isul Ioni hu:Jón-szigetek mk:Јонски Острови nl:Ionische Eilanden ja:イオニア諸島 no:Joniske øyer nn:Dei joniske øyane pnb:آئیاونین جزیرے pl:Wyspy Jońskie pt:Ilhas Jónicas ro:Insulele Ionice ru:Ионические острова sco:Ionian Islands sq:Ishujt e Jonit sk:Iónske ostrovy sh:Jonski otoci fi:Jooniansaaret sv:Joniska öarna th:หมู่เกาะไอโอเนียน tr:İyonya Adaları uk:Іонічні острови vec:Isole Jonie vi:Quần đảo Ionia war:Islas Ionicas zh:伊奧尼亞群島