[ December 2007 ] [ Parc national de Kejimkujik yes geo December 2011 ] [ Kejimkujik National Park II Canadian National Parks Location.png Location of Kejimkujik National Parkin Canada 245 185 Nova Scotia, Canada Halifax 44 23 57 N 65 13 06 W 404 km 2 1968 Parks Canada ] Kejimkujik National Park (often called Keji for short) is part of the Canadian National Parks system, located in the province of Nova Scotia. The park consists of two geographically separate properties: the main park is located in the upland interior of the Nova Scotia peninsula bordering Queens and Annapolis counties; and the much smaller Kejimkujik Seaside unit, located on the Atlantic coast of Queens County. The park covers an area of 404 km 2. The entire inland unit has a double designation: Kejimkujik National Historic Site, making Kejimkujik unique in the park system as the only national park whose virtually entire area is a national historic site. { Park Management Executive Summary } { Little River } Frozen Ocean Lake Still Brook [ Geology and Soils ] The bedrock of the Park consists of Precambrian to Ordovician period quartzite and slate, plus Devonian period granite. All of these rocks, especially quartzite, have a high silica content and provide scanty amounts of nutrients to the soils that develop on them. The slate, however, is fine-grained and produces a loamy soil which yields its nutrients more quickly than the stony sandy loams and loamy sands found over the coarse-grained rocks. Most of the slaty loams occur around Kejimkujik Lake. Deep outwash sands and gravels form a band west of the lake. Elsewhere the soil landscape is dominated by the cobbly, often shallow granite or quartzite material. Podzol s underlie most well-drained areas. Gleysol s and peat bog s dominate where drainage is poor. { http://sis.agr.gc.ca/cansis/publications/ns/ns8b/intro.html D.B. Cann and J. D. Hilchey (1959). Soil Survey of Queens County, Nova Scotia. } { http://sis.agr.gc.ca/cansis/publications/ns/ns16b/intro.html J. I. MacDougall, J. L. Nowland and J. D. Hilchey (1969). Soil Survey of Annapolis County, Nova Scotia. } The Park receives acid rain, and its soils have few available acid-buffering minerals, so strong acidity is the rule for soils and waters—even large bodies of water such as Kejimkujik Lake. { http://www.ilec.or.jp/database/nam/nam-56.html International Lake and Environment Committee -- Kejimkujik Lake } [ Waterways ] Kejimkujik National Park conserves two distinct environments: The large main section of the park is a forested upland plain located approximately 50 kilometres inland from the South Shore and Annapolis Valley and may be accessed from Trunk 8 running between Liverpool and Annapolis Royal. The park is named after Kejimikujik Lake, the largest lake inside the main section of the park. The many lakes and rivers form interior waterways that were important canoe routes between the Bay of Fundy and the Atlantic for the ancestors of the Mi&apos;kmaq. The park also contains the petroglyph s left behind by these inhabitants. The lake&apos;s Mi&apos;kmaq name has been translated as &quot; attempting to escape &quot; or &quot; swollen waters &quot;, possibly related to fishing weir s placed on the lake. The park&apos;s official stance is that Kejimkujik is a Mi&apos;kmaq word meaning &quot; tired muscles &quot;. The smaller Kejimkujik Seaside includes white sandy beaches and coastal wetland areas. The park includes habitat for the endangered Piping Plover and other coastal birds. It is located off Highway 103 near the villages of Port Mouton and Port Joli. [ Rivers ] Rivers in the park include the: Mersey River West River Little River Shelburne River [ Interior Camping ] Although there are numerous drive-in campgrounds in Keji the park is also known for its interior camping: campsites which are only accessible by canoe or hiking in the summer, or ski or snowshoe in the winter. Keji provides excellent canoeing, with numerous navigable lakes and rivers forming an interconnected system. The further a camper progresses from access points, the more wild the park becomes, and it is possible to spend several days in the interior with little or no sight of other campers. Park staff maintain portages along major routes. Interior campsites can vary widely, and none have any permanent shelter. Sufficient bad-weather gear ( tent s, tarps, etc.) should be brought so the trip can remain enjoyable in the face of less-than-perfect weather. All campsites have a firebox, which should be the only location used for fires. Fires made in non-prepared sites can cause underground roots to burn, allowing the fire to spread. [ Hiking ] There are 15 hiking trails available. Details of hiking trails [ Wildlife ] Interior camping can provide excellent wildlife viewing opportunities. Moose, deer, beaver and loon are not uncommon, especially along waterways. Black bears, though present in the park, are seldom seen.There are several uncommon species of organisms that call Kejimkujik their home. The Blanding&apos;s Turtle which is considered an endangered species in Nova Scotia is similar in size to the common Painted Turtle; however the Blanding&apos;s is characterized by its yellow coloured neck. Juveniles measure between 5 and 12  cm in carapace diameter while adult females can measure between 25 and 35  cm. It is a very gentle turtle that frequently nests on beaches that are accessible by the public. For this reason it is important for visitors to be careful not to disturb nesting turtles, and to report any sightings to the visitor centre. Eastern Ribbon Snake is a threatened species in Nova Scotia and lives in several isolated areas in the park. The Eastern Ribbon Snake upon first glance may be easily confused with the common Garter snake, but the Eastern Ribbon Snake is defined by 3 longitudinal yellow stripes on the dorsal side and a black or dark brown colouration. Adult Eastern Ribbon Snakes in the park usually measure between 50 and 70  cm in length. Kejimkujik is one of two places in Canada where Hydrocotyle umbellata or Water Pennywort exists. The other is in Yarmouth County. [ Dark Sky Preserve ] The Park was designated as a Dark Sky Preserve on July 6, 2010 by the Royal Astronomical Society of Canada as part of their Dark Sky Preserve Program. The designation recognizes the commitment by the Park to protect the nighttime environment from the effects of artificial lighting. This policy will maintain the pristine quality of most of the Park by limiting the use of artificial lighting and will benefit the nocturnal wildlife Scotobiology within the Park and preserve the appearance of the night sky for stargazers. [ The Tent Dwellers ] The Tent Dwellers is a book by Albert Bigelow Paine [ Albert Bigelow Paine 1908 The Tent Dwellers The Outing Publishing Co., London, England ] which chronicles his travels through inland Nova Scotia on a trout fishing trip with Dr. Edward &quot; Eddie &quot; Breck, and with guides Charles &quot; the strong &quot; and Del &quot; the stout &quot;, in the early 1900s. Originally published in 1908, the book takes place in what is now Kejimkujik National Park and the Kejimkujik Seaside Tobeatic Game Reserve. The descriptions of the park contained in the book are beautifully written and uncannily accurate:... the shores are green; the river or brook is clear and cold – and tarry black in the deep places; the water leaps and dashes in whirlpools and torrents, and the lakes are fairy lakes, full of green islands – mere ledges, many of them, with two or three sentinel pines – and everywhere the same clear, black water, and always the trout, the wonderful, wild, abounding Nova Scotia trout. Sadly, the trout which brought Paine and Breck to the park area are now largely absent, due to higher acid levels in the water from acid rain. [ Kejimkujik Seaside ] In 1985 Parks Canada acquired lands along the coast of Nova Scotia about [ 25 km mi us ] south of Liverpool. In 1988 these lands became part of Kejimkujik National Park to include coastal ecosystems within Kejimkujik National Park. The land acquisition was important for Canadian culture and heritage due to the expanding development along the East Coast of Canada. These properties are still the largest track of undeveloped coast in Nova Scotia. Kejimkujik Seaside includes two sides, one of which contain trails and parking facilities at St catherines River Beach. The Little Port Joli Basin and Basin Lake side is accessible but not marked as a National Park with signage. The two barrier beaches each of which are nesting sites for the endangered Piping Plover. The lagoons are important migration stops for many species of birds such as Short-billed dowichers, Semipalmated plovers, sandpipers, Black-bellied plovers, and many others. The Little Port Joli Basin and Basin Lake are being used for European green crab research. The removal of the green crabs are essential in research into the dwindling fish stocks on the East Coast. Two trails exists at Kejimkujik Seaside. Port Joli Head Trail is a coastal trail that takes you along the rocky coast of Port Joli Head around berms, and ponds. Cormorants, deer, and the occasional black bear can be seen on this trail. Harbour Rocks Trail takes you straight to the beach through the upland barrens and bogs. The trail continues along the rocky shore to St Catherines River Beach where the clean white sand beach well greet you with its turquoise waters. Seals, cormorants, jellyfish, plovers, great blue heron, deer, mink, osprey and many other forms of wildlife are often seen in this area. Kejimkujik Seaside Adjunct [ See also ] [ Geography of Canada ] List of National Parks of Canada List of parks in Nova Scotia [ References ] [ External links ] [ Kejimkujik National Park ] Official Parks Canada site for Kejimkujik National Park Friends of Keji website Keji @ Google Maps HalifaxTrails.ca Category:National Parks of Canada Category:Parks in Nova Scotia Category:Visitor attractions in Annapolis County, Nova Scotia Category:Visitor attractions in Digby County, Nova Scotia Category:Region of Queens Municipality Category:Protected areas established in 1968 Category:Geography of Annapolis County, Nova Scotia Category:Geography of Digby County, Nova Scotia Category:Geography of Queens County, Nova Scotia Category:Visitor attractions in Queens County, Nova Scotia [ fr ] de:Kejimkujik-Nationalpark es:Parque nacional Kejimkujik eo:Nacia Parko Kejimkujik fr:Parc national de Kejimkujik pl:Park Narodowy Kejimkujik pt:Parque Nacional Kejimkujik ru:Кеджимкуджик (национальный парк) sv:Kejimkujiks nationalpark uk:Кеджімкуджік (національний парк)