[ Timothy-grass Timoteegras plant Phleum pratense subsp pratense.jpg Habitus, ssp. pratense Plantae Angiosperms Monocots Commelinids Poales Poaceae Phleum P. pratense Phleum pratense L. ] Timothy-grass { Clause 5.3.2.2.3 BS 7370-5 } (Phleum pratense), is an abundant perennial grass native to most of Europe except for the Mediterranean region. It grows to 50–150 cm tall, with leaves up to 45 cm long and 1 cm broad. The flower head is 7–15 cm long and 8–10 mm broad, with densely packed spikelets. Timothy-grass can be confused with Meadow Foxtail (Alopecurus pratensis) and Purple-stem Cat&apos;s-tail (Phleum phleoides). It is probably so named after Timothy Hanson, an American farmer said to have introduced it from New England to the southern states in the early 18th century. { Merriam-Webster&apos;s Collegiate Dictionary, 11th ed., p. 1310. } { Oxford English Dictionary, s.v. timothy grass. } [ Subspecies ] There are two subspecies : Phleum pratense subsp. pratense. Larger, to 150 cm tall. Widespread. Phleum pratense subsp. bertolonii. Smaller, to 70 cm tall. Calcareous grassland. Inflorescence [ Cultivation and uses ] Timothy-grass was unintentionally introduced to North America by early settlers, and was first described in 1711 by John Hurd from plants growing in New Hampshire. Hurd named the grass &quot; hurd grass &quot; but a farmer named Timothy Hanson began to promote cultivation of it as a hay about 1720, and the grass has been known by its present name since then. Timothy has now become naturalized throughout most of the US and Canada. It is commonly grown for cattle feed and, in particular, as hay for horse s. It is relatively high in fibre, especially when cut late. It is considered part of the standard mix for grass hay and provides quality nutrition for horses. Timothy Hay is a staple food for domestic pet rabbit s, guinea pig s, chinchillas, and degu s, often making up the bulk of their diet. The caterpillar s of some Lepidoptera use it as a foodplant, e.g. the Essex Skipper (Thymelicus lineola). It also grows in roadsides and abandoned fields but generally requires nutrient-rich soils. Its pollen is a common allergen; it has recently been used in small amounts as part of a new hay fever vaccine Grazax, which is designed to recondition the body&apos;s immune system so it no longer responds to pollen. Plants persist through the winter. Dead, straw-colored flowering stems may persist, but only for a short time, and are recognized by the distinctive spike-like inflorescence. [ Similarity to Other Species ] It is usually confused with Meadow Foxtail (Alopecurus pratensis). Timothy flowers later from June until August, whereas Meadow Foxtail flowers from April until June. The spikelet s of Timothy are twin hornlike projections arranged in cylindrical panicle s, foxtail has a soft, single awn. { BSBI Description retrieved 2010-12-1. } [ Notes ] [ Phleum pratense ] [ Additional references ] Flora Europaea: &apos;&apos;Phleum pratense&apos;&apos; Timothy - US Department of Agriculture Category:Poaceae Category:Flora of Estonia Category:Forages Category:Medicinal plants ar:إفليوم مرجي cs:Bojínek luční da:Eng-Rottehale de:Wiesen-Lieschgras fa:لوئیچه چمنی fr:Fléole des prés hsb:Łučny pasnik is:Vallarfoxgras it:Phleum pratense lt:Pašarinis motiejukas hu:Mezei komócsin ms:Phleum pratense nl:Timoteegras ja:チモシー no:Timotei pl:Tymotka łąkowa fi:Timotei sv:Timotej uk:Тимофіївка лучна wa:Fiole zh:猫尾草 uz:Ajriqbosh