The music of Indiana was strongly influenced by a large number of German and Irish immigrants who arrived in the 1830s. Indiana was one of the first places where jazz music became popular outside of New Orleans and Chicago. In the late 1910s and through the 1920s the state had numerous bands of young musicians playing the new style for dancing. Richmond, Indiana was home to the Gennett Records, known for recording a wealth of jazz, blues, and country music in the 1920s. Indiana-born musicians and composers include John Mellencamp, Michael Jackson, Janet Jackson, Kenneth &apos;Babyface&apos; Edmonds, John Hiatt, Harry Von Tilzer, Rich Mullins, Kris Roe, the Bill Gaither Trio, Albert Von Tilzer, Bobwheat Long, Cole Porter, J. Russell Robinson, Eddie Condon, Hoagy Carmichael, Wes Montgomery, J. J. Johnson, Henry Lee Summer, Axl Rose, Izzy Stradlin, David Lee Roth, Shannon Hoon, Calvin Crabtree, Carrie Newcomer, Janie Fricke, Lonnie Mack and David Baker. Though born in Oklahoma, gospel singer Sandi Patty began her musical career in Indiana at Anderson University. Country music is very thick in Southern Indiana, an area considered part of the Upland South. [ Punk rock ] In Indianapolis, a vibrant 1970s punk rock and New Wave scene existed, including Latex Novelties, Joint Chiefs of Staff and Dow Jones and the Industrials (from West Lafayette ). Probably the most influential Indiana punk band, however, was The Gizmos, from Bloomington, Indiana - who spawned a thriving local alternative scene that included the likes of Amoebas in Chaos and Dancing Cigarettes. Later, a hardcore punk and alternative rock band from Indianapolis called the Zero Boys made some local waves. The Zero Boys started trying to make a local hardcore scene after seeing the Dead Kennedys in Chicago. Paul Mahern of the Zero Boys led the effort, and founded Affirmation Records, releasing several compilations and recordings from Articles of Faith (from Chicago) and local band Killing Children before going out of business. Lafayette / West Lafayette is home to punk rock record label Oi! the boat records who&apos;s roster includes bands from around the US and Europe, notably including Sweden&apos;s Perkele who headline many punk festivals throughout Europe, Lars Frederiksen &apos;s (of Rancid (band) ) side project band The Old Firm Casuals, seminal UK punk bands The Last Resort and Peter and the Test Tube Babies along with many other internationally acclaimed punk and ska groups. Lafayette is also the home of Mass Giogini &apos;s ( Squirtgun Sonic Iguana studios. Currently in Indiana the music scene has changed with bands such as Blood In Blood Out from Northwest Indiana playing harder and more &quot; hardcore &quot; music than in the past. Indianapolis bands, such as The Glory City Disasters, Phoenix Bodies, Bushwhacked, Up! Scumbag, boLth, Cheap Bastard Squad (C//B//S), Mobocrat, Daisycutter, Dead in Marseille, The Five Second Cummings, The Displeased, Toxic Reasons, Wait til Wednesday, Axis &amp; Allies, CounterActive, Wombat and Friends/Oilsnakes/ &quot; _ &quot;, The Mediocres, Sludgepacker, In the Face of War, Venable, Opponents, We The Hunters, The Life We Had, The Contortionist, Stone Throats, Pessoa, and others can be seen playing at The Emerson, The ES Jungle, Barley Island, The Melody Inn, The 1511 House, The Halloween House, Moria, The Firehouse Theatre, 1624 N Harrison St., Fort Wayne Hip Hop and Dance, Jam Crib, and Locals Only. [ January 2010 ] The local scene such as in Whiting,Hammond, and The east side of Chicago have almost all followed the scremo-post hardcore-and hardcore scene. Additionally, in Lafayette/West Lafayette, The Enders have emerged as a post-punk/hardcore band, and played their debut show to a crowd of over 300 people, illustrating the impact of punk and punk-influenced music in Indiana. There is also a small following in pop punk in the area led by bands such as Reclaim the Streets, Cardboard Cutout, and The Brave Day. [ January 2010 ] A few great bands from the southern portion of the state are 7 Days Away, Kramus, Thorn 4 Memory, &amp; Shot 14. In Northern Indiana, South Bend has been a breeding ground for punk bands such as the Urinal Mints, Orphan Donors, The Distractions, Late Work Policy, Negative Nancy, Cause for Concern the Scumbags all whom play shows throughout the Midwest region. South Bend is also home of Plinko productions lead by Garth Plinko who recorded many of South Bend&apos;s punk bands throughout the 90&apos;s. Wrecked Hooligan Records came into fruition in 2012 and has started releasing compilations titled &quot; No Coast, No Problem &quot; which features many of the South Bend Punk Bands, as well as bands throughout the midwest. [ Hardcore ] The Hardcore music scene has been flooding Indiana since early 2000. This is due to the constant influence from Chicago, Detroit, Columbus, Cincinnati, and other large cities in the Midwest bordering Indiana. Bands like Gwen Stacy and Continuance, and Haste The Day have come out of central Indiana. Hardcore music is a growing scene especially in Fort Wayne, IN. AXP is a hardcore band from Warsaw, Indiana who toured the Midwest, East-Coast, and parts of Canada. The Face Of War is a hardcore/ pop-punk band from Kokomo, Indiana. Bands such as AblesLaughter and The Day is Ours,Burnt Among the Ashes and In Silent Ruin have come from Warsaw and Fort Wayne respectively. Through Scarlet Eyes also plays in Fort Wayne Indiana they came from a small town Rochester. All bands gaining a large local fan base and are quickly becoming hometown heroes. Many new bands are coming from towns such as Goshen, Hunnington, Albion, and Fort Wayne. The scene is continuously growing and a larger fan base has also followed. Fort Wayne is an aggressive hardcore scene with many bands such as Cold Reign, Life After Death, and many more. Hardcore has also made its way into Warsaw with Serpent&apos;s Tongue (ex. AXP and Able&apos;sLaughter. Also, Kokirii is a Progressive Melodic Hardcore band who have been playing many shows and is gaining a large local fanbase. Kokirii is known for have a style such as La Dispute, Touche Amore, and Of Machines. [ Urban music ] Hip Hop/ Soul with a style brought from New York, Texas, New Orleans, and Chicago the Indiana hip hop scene has birthed some of the bravest talent in music. In 2008, we were introduced to two new anthems of hope in the Symphonics&apos; &quot; Commencement &quot;, which blazed with vocals by Brendon &quot; Bishop &quot; Garrett, and poetry by John &quot; Juan Blanco &quot; White and the ever present &quot; Dream Again &quot;, which was produced by ManDog Productions. For more info on the Hip Hop/Soul scene in Indy try artists such as BPN, Black Box Ent., Ku-Dos the Kid, Z00 Krew Band, Trip Trae; and Calvin Crabtree with his South Central Indiana style of rap. [ January 2010 ] ]==References== Blush, Steven (2001). American Hardcore: A Tribal History. Los Angeles, CA: Feral House. ISBN 0-922915-71-7. Goshen, Larry, with Shaw, Mark (2002). Let the Good Times Roll: An Anthology of Indiana Music. Mentzer Printing. ISBN 0-9717596-2-6. Schiedt, Duncan P (1977). The Jazz State of Indiana. Indiana Historical Society. ISBN 0-9603528-0-5. Oi! the Boat Records website: www.oitheboat.com [ collapsed ] Category:Indiana culture Indiana