Theocracy is a form of government in which official policy is governed by immediate divine guidance or by officials who are regarded as divinely guided, or is pursuant to the doctrine of a particular religion or religious group. [ http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/theocracy Theocracy; Dictionary – Definition from the Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary Merriam-webster.com 2007-04-25 2009-08-10 ] { http://www.ethosofliberty.com/deliquo.htm &quot; Theocracy - The rule of law is derived from religious doctrine and its decrees are absolute. This type of government is evidenced by a strict Islamic state (a rule of law under the religious code of the Islamic religion). &quot; } { http://www.reasoned.org/glossary.htm &quot; theocracy - Rule by religion. A government that is based on theistic beliefs. Iran is a theocracy. As well was ancient India, in some forms of Hinduism. &quot; } From the perspective of the theocratic government, &quot; God himself is recognized as the head &quot; of the state, { Catholic Encyclopedia &quot; A form of civil government in which God himself is recognized as the head. &quot; } hence the term theocracy, from the Greek [ grc θεοκρατια ] &quot; rule of God &quot;, a term used by Josephus for the kingdoms of Israel and Judah. { English form the 17th century ( } { OED ).The Greek term is explicitly coined by Josephus and isn&apos;t attested elsewhere in Ancient Greek; Josephus marks it as a } { nonce coinage by calling it a &quot; strained expression &quot;.W. Whiston tr. } { Josephus, Against Apion ii. §17 (1814) IV. 340: &quot; He [Moses] ordained our government to be what, by a strained expression, may be termed a Theocracy &quot;, translating } [ grc ὡς δ&apos;ἄν τίς εἴποι, βιασάμενος τὸν λόγον, θεοκρατίαν ] {. } A theocracy may have an administrative hierarchy of the government identical with the administrative hierarchy of the religion, or it may have two &apos;arms,&apos; but with the state administrative hierarchy subordinate to the religious hierarchy. Taken literally or strictly, theocracy means rule by God or gods and refers primarily to an internal &quot; rule of the heart &quot;, especially in its biblical application. The common, generic use of the term, as defined above in terms of rule by a church or analogous religious leadership, would be more accurately described as an ecclesiocracy. { Stephen Palmquist, &apos;&apos;Biblical Theocracy: A vision of the biblical foundations for a Christian political philosophy&apos;&apos; (Hong Kong: Philopsychy Press, 1993), introduced these more precise uses of the terms in arguing that theocracy (in this pure sense) is the only political system defended in the } { Bible. While Palmquist defends theocracy in this pure form as a viable (though &quot; non-political &quot; ) political system, he warns that what normally goes by this name is actually ecclesiocracy, the most dangerous of all political systems. } In a pure theocracy, the civil leader is believed to have a direct personal connection with God. For example, a prophet like Moses led the Israelites, and the prophet Muhammad ruled the early Muslims. Law proclaimed by the ruler is also considered a divine revelation, and hence the law of God. An ecclesiocracy, on the other hand, is a situation where the religious leaders assume a leading role in the state, but do not claim that they are instruments of divine revelation. For example, the prince-bishop s of the European Middle Ages, where the bishop was also the temporal ruler. The papacy in the Papal States occupied a middle ground between theocracy and ecclesiocracy, since the pope did not claim he is a prophet who receives revelation from God, but merely the (in rare cases infallible) interpreter of already-received revelation.Religiously endorsed monarchies fall between these two poles, according to the relative strengths of the religious and political organs. Theocracy should be distinguished from other, secular, forms of government that have a state religion, or are merely influenced by theological or moral concepts, and monarchies held &quot; By the Grace of God &quot;. In the most common usage of the term, some civil rulers are leaders of the dominant religion (e.g., the Byzantine emperor as patron of the head of the official Church); the government claims to rule on behalf of God or a higher power, as specified by the local religion, and divine approval of government institutions and laws. These characteristics apply also to a caesaropapist regime. The Byzantine Empire however was not theocratic since the patriarch answered to the emperor, not vice versa; similarly in Tudor England the crown forced the church to break away from Rome so the royal (and, especially later, parliamentary) power could assume full control of the now Anglican hierarchy and confiscate most church property and income. Secular governments can also coexist with a state religion or delegate some aspects of civil law to religious communities. For example, in Israel marriage is governed by officially recognized religious bodies who each provide marriage services for their respected adherents, yet no form of civil marriage (free of religion, for atheists, for example) exists nor marriage by non recognized minority religions. India similarly delegates control of marriage and some other civil matters to the religious communities, in large part as a way of accommodating its Muslim minority. [ Etymology ] The word theocracy originates from the Greek [ grc θεοκρατία ], meaning &quot; the rule of God &quot;. This in turn derives from the Greek words [ grc θεός ] (theos), meaning &quot; god &quot;, and [ grc κρατεῖν ] (kratein), meaning &quot; to rule. &quot; Thus the meaning of the word in Greek was &quot; rule by god (s) &quot; or human incarnation(s) of god(s). It was first coined by Josephus Flavius in the first century A.D. to describe the characteristic government for Jew s. Josephus argued that while the Greeks recognized three types of government: monarchy, aristocracy, and anarchy, the Jews were unique in that they had a system of government that did not fit into those categories. Josephus understood theocracy as a fourth form of government in which only God and his law is sovereign. Josephus&apos; definition was widely accepted until the Enlightenment era, when the term started to collect more universalistic [ April 2010 ] and negative connotation s, especially in Hegel &apos;s hands. The first recorded English use was in 1622, with the meaning &quot; sacerdotal government under divine inspiration &quot; (as in Biblical Israel before the rise of kings); the meaning &quot; priestly or religious body wielding political and civil power &quot; is recorded from 1825. [ Current theocracies ] [ Islamic states ] [ Islamic state ] [ Sharia ] An Islamic state is a state that has adopted Islam, specifically Sharia, as its foundations for political institutions, or laws, exclusively, and has implemented the Islamic ruling system khilafah (Arabic: خلافة), and is therefore a theocracy. Although there is much debate as to which states or groups operate strictly according to Islamic Law, Sharia is the official basis for state laws in the following countries: Yemen, Afghanistan, Somalia, Sudan, Saudi Arabia, Mauritania, Oman and Iran. In Nigeria, the constitution provides that states may elect to use Shari&apos;a laws and courts, though non-Muslims are not required in any state to submit to Shari&apos;a jurisdiction and adherence varies by state. { http://www.state.gov/g/drl/rls/irf/2006/71318.htm } Saudi Arabia maintains religious courts for all aspects of law and has religious police to maintain social compliance. Also Iran maintains religious courts for all aspects of law and has religious police to maintain social compliance, while its government is described as a &quot; theocratic republic &quot;. [ https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/ir.html CIA World Factbook – Iran Cia.gov 2009-08-10 ] Iran&apos;s head of state, or Supreme Leader, is appointed by an elected body called Assembly of Experts. { Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Iran, &apos;&apos;Articles 107-112&apos;&apos;. } The Council of Guardians, considered part of the executive branch of government, is responsible for determining if legislation is in line with Islamic law and customs (the Sharia ), and can bar candidates from elections, and greenlight or ban investigations into the election process. Pakistan has Islam as its only official religion and its Federal Shariat Court has the duty of striking down any law not complying with the Sharia code of Islamic law; however, ruling falls upon legal scholars who, while required to be Muslim, are not religious clergy. [ Holy See (Vatican City) ] [ Politics of Vatican City ] Following the unification of Italy, Vatican City became the last surviving territory of the former Papal States. [ https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/vt.html CIA World Factbook – Holy See Cia.gov 2009-08-10 ] In 1929, the State of Vatican City was formally recognized as an independent state through treaties with the Italian government. The head of state of the Vatican is the pope, elected by the College of Cardinals, an assembly of Senatorial-princes of the Church, who are usually clerics, appointed as Ordinaries, but in the past have also included men who were not bishops nor clerics. A pope is elected for life, and voting is limited to cardinals under 80 years of age. A Secretary for Relations with States, directly responsible for international relations, is appointed by the pope. The Vatican legal system is rooted in canon law but ultimately is decided by the pope; the Bishop of Rome as the Supreme Pontiff, &quot; has the fullness of legislative, executive and judicial powers. &quot; { Fundamental Law of Vatican City State, Art. 1 §1 } The government of the Vatican can also be considered an ecclesiocracy (ruled by the Church ) [ Central Tibetan Administration ] The Central Tibetan Administration, colloquially known as the Tibetan government in exile, is a Tibetan exile organisation with a state-like internal structure. According to its charter, the position of head of state of the Central Tibetan Administration belongs ex officio to the current Dalai Lama, a religious hierarch. In this respect, it continues the traditions of the former government of Tibet, which was ruled by the Dalai Lamas and their ministers, with a specific role reserved for a class of monk official s. On March 14, 2011, at the 14th Dalai Lama &apos;s suggestion, the parliament of the Central Tibetan Administration began considering a proposal to remove the Dalai Lama&apos;s role as head of state in favor of an elected leader. [ States with official state religion ] [ State religion ] Having a state religion is not sufficient to be a theocracy. Many countries have a state religion without government directly deriving its powers from a divine authority, or direct government powers exercised by religious authority. [ Historic states with theocratic aspects ] [ Imperial cult ] The largest and best known theocracies in history were the Umayyad and early Abassid Caliphate, and the Papal States. And as with any other state or empire, pragmatism was part of the politics of these de jure theocracies. [ Antiquity ] [ Imperial cult State church of the Roman Empire Israelites ] The imperial cult s in Ancient Egypt and elsewhere deified the ruling monarch, so that the state religion was dedicated to the worship of the ruler as a deity, or the incarnation of a deity. Early Israel was ruled by Judges before instituting a monarchy. The Judges were believed to be representatives of YWH or Jehovah God. In ancient and medieval Christianity, Caesaropapism is the doctrine where a head of state is at the same time the head of the church. [ Christian ] Geneva, during the period of John Calvin &apos;s greatest influence and the Massachusetts Bay Colony of the &quot; Puritans &quot; had many characteristics of Protestant theocracies. During the short reign (1494–1498) of Girolamo Savonarola, a Dominican priest, the city of Florence could have been considered a theocracy. During his rule, un-Christian books, statues, poetry, and other items were burned (in the Bonfire of the Vanities ), sodomy was made a capital offense, and other Christian practices became law. Although having a lay ruler (the King of Jerusalem) the Crusader Kingdom of Jerusalem (1099-1299) is considered to have some theocratic influences. Also the Commonwealth of England under Oliver Cromwell as Lord Protector is also considered to have a considerable amount of theocratic influence. The Heavenly Kingdom of Great Peace, the rebel faction of the Taiping Rebellion in 1860s Qing China was a heterodox Christian Theocracy led by the self proclaimed younger brother of Jesus Christ, Hong Xiuquan. This theocratic state fought one of the most destructive wars in history, essentially being a haphazard proto - Communist military dictatorship, against the Qing Dynasty for fifteen years before being crushed following the fall of the capital Nanking. [ Mormonism ] [ June 2011 ] [ Theodemocracy State of Deseret ] Another ecclesiocracy was the administration of the short-lived State of Deseret, an independent entity briefly organized in the American West by The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Its original borders stretched from western Colorado to the southern California coast. When the Mormons arrived in the valley of the Great Salt Lake in 1847, the Great Basin was still a part of Mexico and had no secular government. As a result, Brigham Young administered the region both spiritually and temporally through the highly organized and centralized Melchizedek Priesthood. This original organization was based upon a concept called theodemocracy, a governmental system combining Biblical theocracy with mid-19th-century American political ideals, including heavy reliance upon the U.S. Constitution. The treaty of Guadalupe Hildalgo resulted in the Mexican Cession by which Deseret was incorporated into the United States. In 1849, the Saints organized a secular government in Utah, although many ecclesiatical leaders maintained their positions of secular power. The Mormons also petitioned Congress to have Deseret admitted into the Union as a state. However, under the Compromise of 1850, Utah Territory was created and Brigham Young was appointed governor. In this situation, Young still stood as head of the LDS Church as well as Utah&apos;s secular government. After the abortive Utah War of 1857–1858, the replacement of Young by an outside Federal Territorial Governor, the eventual resolution of controversies regarding plural marriage, and accession by Utah to statehood, the apparent temporal aspects of LDS theodemocracy receded markedly. However, — like many Christians, Jews, and Muslims — Latter-day Saints regard some form of theocracy with God as the head (king) of a chiliastic world government to be the true political ideal. But, until the Second Coming of Christ, the Mormons teach in their 12th Article of Faith: submission to the powers that be. But true to their beliefs in individual liberty and moral accountability, they exhibit a strong preference for democratic-republican, representative government as embodied in the Constitution of the United States. [ Montenegro ] Prince-Bishopric of Montenegro offers a singular example of monarchs willingly turning their power to ecclesiastic authority (Montenegrin Orthodox), as the last of the House of Crnojević (styled Grand Voivode, not sovereign princes) did, in order to preserve national unity before the Ottoman onslaught as a separate millet under an autochthonous ethnarch. When Montenegro re-established secular dynastic succession by the proclamation of princedom in 1851, it did so in favor of the last Prince-bishop, who changed his style from Vladika i upravitelj Crne Gore i Brde &quot; Vladika (Bishop) and Ruler of Montenegro and Brda &quot; to Po Bozjoj milosti knjaz i gospodar Crne Gore i Brde &quot; By the grace of God Prince and Sovereign of Montenegro and Brda &quot;, thus rendering his de facto dynasty (the Petrović-Njegoš family since 1696) a hereditary one. [ Islam ] The period when Medina was ruled by the Islamic prophet Muhammad is occasionally classed as a theocracy. By 630, Muhammad had established a theocracy in Makkah. Most Sunni Muslims believe that only the Prophet Muhammad was able to be both a governmental as well as religious leader. Other plausible examples of Islamic theocracy might be Mahdist Sudan and the Taliban state in Afghanistan (1996–2001). Also the governing is also done by a Caliphate with smaller levels of governing done by Qazi also known as Qadi. Most irregular was the non-permanent rule of the Akhoond s (imams) in the later princely state of Swat, a valley in (first British India&apos;s, later Pakistan&apos;s) North-West Frontier Province. Theocratic movements arose in the Arab world in the 1970s. [ Buddhism ] Unified religious rule in Tibet began in 1642, when the Fifth Dalai Lama allied with the military power of the Mongol Gushri Khan to consolidate the political power and center control around his office as head of the Gelug school. [ Davidson Ronald M. Tibet 2004 Macmillan Encyclopedia of Buddhism Buswell, Jr. Robert E. 851–859 USA Macmillan Reference USA 0-02-865910-4 ] This form of government is known as the dual system of government. Prior to 1642, particular monasteries and monks had held considerable power throughout Tibet, but had not achieved anything approaching complete control, though power continued to be held in a diffuse, feudal system after the ascension of the Fifth Dalai Lama. Power in Tibet was held by a number of traditional elites, including members of the nobility, the heads of the major Buddhist sects (including their various tulku s ), and various large and influential monastic communities. [ Lopez Donald S. Prisoners of Shangri-La: Tibetan Buddhism and the West Chicago University of Chicago Press 1998 9 Donald S. Lopez, Jr. 0-226-49311-3 DUPLICATE DATA: year=1998 ] Political power was sometimes used by monastic leaders to suppress rival religious schools through the confiscation of property and direct violence. [ http://www.michaelparenti.org/Tibet.html Friendly Feudalism – The Tibet Myth Michaelparenti.org 2009-08-10 ] [ November 2010 H3llBot ] Social mobility was somewhat possible through the attainment of a monastic education, or recognition as a reincarnated teacher, but such institutions were dominated by the traditional elites and governed by political intrigue. Non-Buddhists in Tibet were members of an outcast underclass. The Bogd Khaanate period of Mongolia (1911-1919) is also cited as a former Buddhist theocracy. [ Fictional theocracies ] Depictions of a fictional society dominated by a theocracy recur in science fiction, speculative fiction and fantasy. Such depictions are mostly dystopian, and in some cases humorous or satirical. The Earthquake in Chile, By Heinrich von Kleist (1807) &apos;&apos;Voyagers VI The Return, By Ben Bova If This Goes On— / Revolt in 2100 by Robert Heinlein (1940, revised and expanded 1953) Gather, Darkness by Fritz Leiber (1943) The Lovers by Philip Jose Farmer (1952 novella, expanded to full length 1961, revised 1977) A Woman a Day (also &quot; Moth and Rust &quot; and &quot; The Day of Timestop &quot; ) by Philip Jose Farmer (1953 novella, expanded to full length 1960, same universe as &quot; The Lovers &quot; ) Messiah by Gore Vidal (1954) ISBN 0-14-118039-0 Lord of Light by Roger Zelazny (1967) The Last Starship from Earth by John Boyd (1968) The Goblin Tower by L. Sprague de Camp (1968) (episode set in the theocratic city-state of Tarxia) The Stork Factor by Zach Hughes (1975) Run, Come See Jerusalem! by Richard C. Meredith (1976) The Handmaid&apos;s Tale by Margaret Atwood (1985). See Republic of Gilead. Candle by John Barnes (2000). New York: Tor. ISBN 0-8125-8968-8. The Sky So Big and Black by John Barnes (2003). New York: Tor. ISBN 0-7653-4222-7 The Accidental Time Machine by Joe Haldeman (2007) The land of Karse in Mercedes Lackey &apos;s Velgarth novels The Church Universal and Triumphant in S. M. Stirling &apos;s Emberverse series In Fire Emblem: The Sacred Stones, Pontifex Mansel leads the Theocracy of Rausten. In Fire Emblem: Path of Radiance, Begnion is a theocracy worshipping the goddess Ashera. It is ruled by Apostle Sanaki. The alien alliance known as &quot; the Covenant &quot; in the Halo series. Atlantis in Age of Mythology is supposed to be governed by a theocrat. The politics are not explored however, and it is not stated how the theocrat kept himself in power when the gods abandoned the civilisation in the expansion pack&apos;s campaign. The Amarr Empire in EVE Online The Imperium of Man from Warhammer 40,000, administered by the High Lords of Terra in the God-Emperor&apos;s name. [ See also ] Christian: Christian Reconstructionism Divine Right of Kings Dominionism Falange National Catholicism Organizational structure of Jehovah&apos;s Witnesses Rexism Theonomy Ustaše Islamic: Iranian Revolution Islamic banking Islamic republic Islamic state Islamism Political aspects of Islam Religious police Qutbism Taliban Wahhabi Other: Khalistan Unification Church and political involvement [ References ] [ Further reading ] [ Ankerl Guy Global communication without universal civilization 2000 INU societal research, vol.  1: Coexisting contemporary civilizations: Arabo-Muslim, Bharati, Chinese, and Western INU Press Geneva 2-88155-004-5 ] Hirschl, Ran. Constitutional Theocracy. Harvard University Press, 2010. ISBN 0-674-04819-9, 978-0-674-04819-5. [ External links ] Biblical Theocracy, etext of a book by Stephen Palmquist (Philopsychy Press, 1993). EtymologyOnLine Is Judaism a Theocracy? chabad.org First Things, August/September 2006, p. 23-30 – Theocracy, Theocracy, Theocracy Caliphate: The Future of Islamic Theocracy Freedom of Religion in Israel Category:Articles with inconsistent citation formats Category:Religion and politics Category:Religious law Category:Separation of church and state Category:Oligarchy Category:Government Category:Forms of government af:Teokrasie ar:ثيقراطية ast:Teocracia az:Teokratiya zh-min-nan:Sîn-chú-chú-gī be:Тэакратыя be-x-old:Тэакратыя bg:Теокрация bo:ལྷ་དབང་ཆབ་སྲིད་ལམ་ལུགས། ca:Teocràcia cs:Teokracie cy:Theocrataeth da:Teokrati de:Theokratie et:Teokraatia el:Θεοκρατία es:Teocracia eo:Teokratio eu:Teokrazia fa:حاکمیت دینی fo:Teokrati fr:Théocratie fy:Teokrasy gl:Teocracia ko:신정 정치 hi:धर्मतंत्र hr:Teokracija io:Teokratio id:Teokrasi is:Klerkaveldi it:Teocrazia he:תאוקרטיה ka:თეოკრატია kk:Теократия ht:Teokrasi ky:Теократия lv:Teokrātija lb:Theokratie lt:Teokratija hu:Teokrácia mk:Теократија ml:ദിവ്യാധിപത്യം arz:ثيوقراطيه ms:Teokrasi mwl:Teocracie nl:Theocratie ja:神権政治 no:Teokrati nn:Teokrati pl:Teokracja pt:Teocracia ro:Teocrație ru:Теократия scn:Teocrazzìa simple:Theocracy sl:Teokracija sr:Теократија sh:Teokracija fi:Teokratia sv:Teokrati tl:Teokrasya th:เทวาธิปไตย tr:Teokrasi uk:Теократія war:Teokrasyá zh:神權政治