For the similarly spelled Christian movement, see Arathi. { blessing during a } { Durga puja celebration. } Aarti ( Hindi आरती), also spelled arathi, aarthi (from the Sanskrit term &quot; harati &quot; (to take away) is a Hindu religious ritual of worship, a part of puja, in which light from wicks soaked in ghee (purified butter) or camphor is offered to one or more deities. Aartis also refer to the songs sung in praise of the deity, when lamps are being offered. [ Origin ] An aarti plate. Aarti is said to have descended from the Vedic concept of fire rituals, or homa. In the traditional aarti ceremony, the flower represents the earth (solidity), the water and accompanying handkerchief correspond with the water element (liquidity), the lamp or candle represents the fire component (heat), the peacock fan conveys the precious quality of air (movement), and the yak-tail fan represents the subtle form of ether (space). The incense represents a purified state of mind, and one’s &quot; intelligence &quot; is offered through the adherence to rules of timing and order of offerings. Thus, one’s entire existence and all facets of material creation are symbolically offered to the Lord via the aarti ceremony. { Rosen, Steven (2006). Essential Hinduism. Praeger Publishers. ISBN 0-275-99006-0 } The word may also refer to the traditional Hindu devotional song that is sung during the ritual. Aarti is performed and sung to develop the highest love for God. &quot; Aa &quot; means &quot; towards or to &quot;, and &quot; rati &quot; means &quot; right or virtue &quot; in Sanskrit. It is sometimes thought the word is from a type of cloth or as followers wore over the bodies during the ritual, or a &quot; shiny cloth &quot; means they wear it for a religious practice. [ September 2010 ] [ Practice ] { Ganga Aarti with open flames, at Dashashwamedh ghat, } { Varanasi } Aarti is generally performed one to five times daily, and usually at the end of a puja (in South India) or bhajan session (in North India). It is performed during almost all Hindu ceremonies and occasions. It involves the circulating of an &apos;Aarti plate&apos; or &apos;Aarti lamp&apos; around a person or deity and is generally accompanied by the singing of songs in praise of that deva or person (many versions exist). In doing so, the plate or lamp is supposed to acquire the power of the deity. The priest circulates the plate or lamp to all those present. They cup their down-turned hands over the flame and then raise their palms to their forehead - the purificatory blessing, passed from the deva&apos;s image to the flame, has now been passed to the devotee. { Ganges, } { Varanasi } The aarti plate is generally made of metal, usually silver, bronze or copper. On it must repose a lamp made of kneaded flour, mud or metal, filled with oil or ghee. One or more cotton wicks (always an odd number) are put into the oil and then lighted, or camphor is burnt instead. The plate may also contain flowers, incense and akshata. { Akshata: (Sanskrit) &quot; Unbroken. &quot; Unmilled, uncooked rice, often mixed with turmeric, offered as a sacred substance during puja, or in blessings for individuals at weddings and other ceremonies. This, the very best food, is the finest offering a devotee can give to God or a wife can give to her husband. } In some temples, a plate is not used and the priest holds the ghee lamp in his hand when offering it to the Deities. The purpose of performing aarti is the waving of lighted wicks before the deities in a spirit of humility and gratitude, wherein faithful followers become immersed in God&apos;s divine form. It symbolises the five elements: 1) ether (akash), 2) wind (vayu), 3) fire (agni), 4) water (jal), and 5) earth (pruthvi). Communal Aarti is performed in the mandir; however, devotees also perform it in their homes. [ Significance ] { Durga slaying } { Mahisasur. } When aarti is performed, the performer faces the deity of God (or divine element, e.g. Ganges river) and concentrates on the form of God by looking into the eyes of the deity (it is said that eyes are the windows to the soul) to get immersed. The flame of the aarti illuminates the various parts of the deity so that the performer and onlookers may better see and concentrate on the form. Aarti is waved in circular fashion, in clockwise manner around the deity. After every circle (or second or third circle), when Aarti has reached the bottom (6-8 o&apos; clock position), the performer waves it backwards while remaining in the bottom (4-6 o&apos; clock position) and then continues waving it in clockwise fashion. The idea here is that aarti represents our daily activities, which revolves around God, a center of our life. Looking at God while performing aarti reminds the performer (and the attendees of the aarti) to keep God at the center of all activities and reinforces the understanding that routine worldly activities are secondary in importance. This understanding would give the believers strength to withstand the unexpected grief and keeps them humble and remindful of God during happy moments. Apart from worldly activities aarti also represents one&apos;s self - thus, aarti signifies that one is peripheral to Godhead or divinity. This would keep one&apos;s ego down and help one remain humble in spite of high social and economic rank. A third commonly held understanding of the ritual is that aarti serves as a reminder to stay vigilant so that the forces of material pleasures and desires cannot overcome the individual. Just as the lighted wick provides light and chases away darkness, the vigilance of an individual can keep away the influence of the material world. { Rosen, Steven. Essential Hinduism. 1st. Westport: Praeger Publishers, 2006. } Aarti is not only limited to God. Aarti can performed not only to all forms of life, but also inanimate objects which help in progress of the culture. This is exemplified by performer of the aarti waving aarti to all the devotees as the aarti comes to the end - signifying that everyone has a part of God within that the performer respects and bows down to. It is also a common practice to perform aarti to inanimate objects like vehicles, electronics etc. at least when a Hindu starts using it, just as a gesture of showing respect and praying that this object would help one excel in the work one would use it for. It is similar to the ritual of doing auspicious red mark(s) using kanku(kumkum) and rice. [ Aarti songs ] { Goddess Ganga, at &apos;&apos;Har-ki-Pauri&apos;&apos;, } { Haridwar } Hinduism has a long tradition of aarti songs, simply referred to as &apos;Aarti&apos;, sung as an accompaniment to the ritual of aarti. It primarily eulogizes to the deity the ritual is being offered to, and several sects have their own version of the common aarti songs that are often sung on chorus at various temples, during evening and morning aartis. Sometimes they also contain snippets of information on the life of the gods. The most commonly sung aarti is that is dedicated to all deities is Om Jai Jagdish Hare, known as &quot; The Universal Aarti &quot; and is another common aarti song. Its variation are used for other deities as well such as Om jai Shiv omkara,Om jai Lakshmi mata,Om jai Ambe gauri,Om jai Adya Shakti. In Swaminarayan Mandirs, Jay Sadguru Swami is the aarti that is sung. In most temples in India, aarti is performed at least twice a day, after the ceremonial puja, which is the time when the largest number of devotees congregates. [ Aarti in South Indian temples ] After aarti, a boy with aarti plate, with kumkum, diya being taken to the devotees Aarti performed at South Indian temples consists of offering a camphor lamp (or oil lamp) to the Deities and then distributing it to the devotees, who line up. They hover their hands over the flame and touch their hands to their eyes, this may be done once or three times. It is the last ritual performed in puja. Aarti is also referred to as Deepa Aaradhanai in Tamil, Deepaaradhanay in Kannada, Deepaaradhanamu in Telegu, Deepaaradhana in Malayalam [ Aarti in Gaudiya Vaishnavism ] In Gaudiya Vaishnavism, aarti refers to the whole puja ritual, of which offering the lamp is only one part. A shankha (conch) is blown to start the aarti, then an odd number of incense sticks are offered to the deity. The lamp is offered next, and then circulated among the devotees. A conch is then filled with water, and offered; the water is then poured into a sprinkler and sprinkled over the devotees. A cloth and flowers are then offered, and the flowers are circulated to the devotees, who sniff them. The deity is then fanned with a camara whisk, and a peacock fan in hot countries. [ Aarti dance in Durga Puja ] Aarti dance in Bangalore, 2009. During the Bengali festival Durga Puja ritual drummers – dhaki s, carrying large leather-strung dhak, show off their skills during ritual dance worships called Aarati or Dhoop dance. [ October 2011 ] [ Aarti as a given name ] Aarti (also spelt Arati, Arthi, Aarthi, Aarthy, Aarti or Arti) is also a name for Indian women. [ See also ] Jai Jagdish Hare Jay Sadguru Swami Shankha Blessing Mantrapushpanjali [ Notes ] [ External links ] [ Aarti ] Article about Aarti 30 Hindu Deities Aarti Ganges Arati Video Quicktime streaming video of worship of the Ganges in Haridwar Online Aartis of Shree Ganesha, ShreeDutta, Bhagwan Shiva, Saaibaba and Mantrapushpanjali Aarti in Hindi Category:Aarti Category:Hindu music Category:Sanskrit words and phrases Category:Indian feminine given names fr:Ārtī hi:आरती it:Arathi mr:आरती nl:Aarti or:ଆରତୀ pl:Arati ru:Арати te:హారతి uk:Араті