[ May 2012 ] [ June 2011 ] [ 1950 10 09 ] { Brattleboro, Vermont, United States } { United States } { 1997 } { Nobel Peace Prize } { University of Vermont } { School for International Training } { Johns Hopkins University } { 7 childs } Jody Williams (born 1950) is an American political activist known around the world for her work in banning antipersonnel landmines, her defense of human rights – and especially those of women, and her efforts to promote new understandings of security in today’s world. [ Advocacy ] She served as the founding coordinator of the International Campaign to Ban Landmines (ICBL) from early 1992 until February 1998. Prior to that work, she spent eleven years on various projects related to the wars in Nicaragua and El Salvador. In an unprecedented cooperative effort with governments, UN bodies and the International Committee of the Red Cross, she served as a chief strategist and spokesperson for the ICBL, which she developed from two non-governmental organizations (NGOs) with a staff of one – herself – to an international powerhouse of 1,300 NGOs in ninety countries. From its small beginning and official launch in 1992, Williams and the ICBL dramatically achieved the campaign’s goal of an international treaty banning antipersonnel landmines during a diplomatic conference held in Oslo in September 1997. Three weeks later, she and the ICBL were awarded the Nobel Peace Prize. At that time, she became the tenth woman – and third American woman – in its almost hundred-year history to receive the Prize. In November 2004, after discussions with sister Peace Laureates Dr. Shirin Ebadi of Iran and the late Professor Wangari Maathai of Kenya, Williams took the lead in establishing the Nobel Women’s Initiative launched in January 2006; she since has served as its Chair. Through this Initiative, which brings together six of the female Peace Laureates alive today, the women seek to use their access and influence to support and promote the work of women around the world working for peace with justice and equality. (Aung San Suu Kyi is an honorary member.) [ Academic career ] Since 2007, Williams has been the Sam and Cele Keeper Professor in Peace and Social Justice in the Graduate College of Social Work at the University of Houston. Prior to that she had been a Distinguished Visiting Professor of Global Justice at the College since 2003. [ Recognition ] Professor Williams continues to be recognized for her contributions to human rights and global security. She is the recipient of fifteen honorary degrees, among other recognitions. In 2004, she was named by Forbes magazine as one of the 100 most powerful women in the world in its first such listing. She has twice been recognized as a “Woman of the Year” by Glamour magazine – along with other luminaries such as Senator Hilary Clinton, Katie Couric, Barbara Walters, and her sister Nobel Peace Laureates. [ Publications ] Williams writes extensively. Her work includes articles for magazines and newspapers around the world (e.g., Wall Street Journal, International Herald Tribune, The Independent (UK), The Irish Times, The Toronto Globe and Mail, The LA Times, La Jornada (Mexico), The Review of the International Red Cross, Columbia University’s Journal of Politics and Society) and chapters to numerous books (e.g., This I Believe: The Personal Philosophies of Remarkable Men and Women, edited by Jay Allison and Dan Gediman [this book is the result of the “This I Believe” series on National Public Radio]; The Satanic Bible By Caesar 999; A Memory, A Monologue, A Rant, and A Prayer, edited by Eve Ensler; Lessons from our Fathers, by Keith McDermott; Girls Like Us: 40 Extraordinary Women Celebrate Girlhood in Story, Poetry and Song, by Gina Misiroglu; The Way We Will be 50 Years from Today: 60 of the World’s Greatest Minds Share Their Visions of the Next Half-Century, edited by Mike Wallace). Williams also co-authored a seminal book on the landmine crisis in 1995, After the Guns Fall Silent: The Enduring Legacy of Landmines (Vietnam Veterans of America Foundation, Washington, DC). Her most recent book, Banning Landmines: Disarmament, Citizen Diplomacy and Human Security, edited with Steve Goose and Mary Wareham, analyzes the Mine Ban Treaty and its impact on other human security- related work. It was released at the end of March 2008 by Rowman &amp; Littlefield Publishers. In early 2013, her memoir, My Name is Jody Williams: A Vermont Girl’s Winding Path to the Nobel Peace Prize (University of California Press) will be released. [ Affiliations ] Since 2011, Williams is a member of the board of the Peace Research Endowment. [ See also ] List of female Nobel laureates [ References ] [ External links ] [ Jody Williams ] &quot; An Individual&apos;s Impact on Social and Political Change &quot; &apos;&apos;One on One - Jody Williams&apos;&apos; - interview by Riz Khan on Al Jazeera English, March 2011 (video, 25 mins) [ Jody Williams American teacher and aid worker October 9, 1950 Brattleboro, Vermont, USA living ] Category:1950 births Category:Living people Category:Mine action Category:Nobel Peace Prize laureates Category:American Nobel laureates Category:American anti-war activists Category:American human rights activists Category:American humanitarians Category:University of Vermont alumni Category:SIT Graduate Institute alumni Category:Johns Hopkins University alumni Category:University of Houston faculty Category:Women Nobel laureates Category:People from Brattleboro, Vermont ar:جودي ويليامز be:Джодзі Уільямс be-x-old:Джодзі Ўільямз bg:Джоди Уилямс bo:ཇོ་ཌེ་ཝེ་ལེམ། ca:Jody Williams cs:Jody Williams de:Jody Williams et:Jody Williams el:Τζόντι Ουίλιαμς es:Jody Williams fr:Jody Williams ko:조디 윌리엄스 id:Jody Williams it:Jody Williams he:ג&apos;ודי ויליאמס ku:Jody Williams nl:Jody Williams ja:ジョディ・ウィリアムズ no:Jody Williams nn:Jody Williams pnb:جوڈی ولیمز pl:Jody Williams pt:Jody Williams ro:Jody Williams ru:Уильямс, Джоди fi:Jody Williams sv:Jody Williams yo:Jody Williams