[ the article has poor information content and addresses only a few parts of the topic January 2011 ] Theoretical chemistry seeks to provide theories that explain chemical observations. Often, it uses mathematical and computational methods. Quantum chemistry, the application of quantum mechanics to the understanding of valency, is a major component of theoretical chemistry. Other major components include molecular dynamics, statistical thermodynamics and theories of electrolyte solutions, reaction networks, polymerization and catalysis. [ An alternative approach ] Theoretical chemistry involves the use of physics to explain or predict chemical phenomena. In recent years, it has consisted primarily of quantum chemistry, i.e., the application of quantum mechanics to problems in chemistry. Theoretical chemistry may be broadly divided into electronic structure, dynamics, and statistical mechanics. In the process of solving the problem of predicting chemical reactivities, these may all be invoked to various degrees [ February 2012 ]. Other &quot; miscellaneous &quot; research areas in theoretical chemistry include the mathematical characterization of bulk chemistry in various phases (e.g. the study of chemical kinetics ) and the study of the applicability of more recent math developments to the basic areas of study (e.g. for instance the possible application of principles of topology to the study of electronic structure). The latter area of theoretical chemistry is sometimes referred to [ February 2012 ] as mathematical chemistry. Much of this may be categorized [ February 2012 ] as computational chemistry, although computational chemistry usually refers to the application of theoretical chemistry in an applied setting, usually with some approximation scheme such as certain types of post-Hartree–Fock, density functional theory, semiempirical methods (such as PM3 ) or force field methods. Some chemical theorists [ February 2012 ] apply statistical mechanics to provide a bridge between the microscopic phenomena of the quantum world and the macroscopic bulk properties of systems. Theoretical attacks on chemical problems go back to the earliest days [ February 2012 ], but until the formulation of the Schrödinger equation by the Austria n physicist Erwin Schrödinger, the techniques available were rather crude and speculative. Currently, much more sophisticated theoretical approaches, based on Quantum Field Theory and Nonequilibrium Green Function Theory are in vogue [ February 2012 ]. [ Branches of theoretical chemistry ] Quantum chemistry The application of quantum mechanics to chemistry Computational chemistry The application of computer code s to chemistry Molecular modelling Methods for modelling molecular structures without necessarily referring to quantum mechanics. Examples are molecular docking, protein-protein docking, drug design, combinatorial chemistry. Molecular dynamics Application of classical mechanics for simulating the movement of the nuclei of an assembly of atoms and molecules. Molecular mechanics Modelling of the intra- and inter-molecular interaction potential energy surface s via a sum of interaction force s. Mathematical chemistry Discussion and prediction of the molecular structure using mathematical methods without necessarily referring to quantum mechanics. Theoretical chemical kinetics Theoretical study of the dynamical system s associated to reactive chemical s and their corresponding differential equation s. Cheminformatics (also known as chemoinformatics) The use of computer and informational techniques, applied to a range of problems in the field of chemistry. [ Closely related disciplines ] Historically, the major field of application of theoretical chemistry has been in the following fields of research: Atomic physics : The discipline dealing with electrons and atomic nuclei. Molecular physics : The discipline of the electrons surrounding the molecular nuclei and of movement of the nuclei. This term usually refers to the study of molecules made of a few atoms in the gas phase. But some consider that molecular physics is also the study of bulk properties of chemicals in terms of molecules. Physical chemistry and chemical physics : Chemistry investigated via physical methods like laser techniques, scanning tunneling microscope, etc. The formal distinction between both fields is that physical chemistry is a branch of chemistry while chemical physics is a branch of physics. In practice this distinction is quite vague. Many-body theory : The discipline studying the effects which appear in systems with large number of constituents. It is based on quantum physics – mostly second quantization formalism – and quantum electrodynamics. Hence, the theoretical chemistry discipline is sometimes seen [ February 2012 ] as a branch of those fields of research. Nevertheless, more recently, with the rise of the density functional theory and other methods like molecular mechanics, the range of application has been extended to chemical systems which are relevant to other fields of chemistry and physics like biochemistry, condensed matter physics, nanotechnology or molecular biology. [ Bibliography ] Attila Szabo and Neil S. Ostlund, Modern Quantum Chemistry: Introduction to Advanced Electronic Structure Theory, Dover Publications; New Ed edition (1996) ISBN 0-486-69186-1, ISBN 978-0-486-69186-2 Robert G. Parr and Weitao Yang, Density-Functional Theory of Atoms and Molecules, Oxford Science Publications; first published in 1989; ISBN 0-19-504279-4, ISBN 0-19-509276-7 [ Quotations ] [ The deepest part of Theoretical Chemistry must end up in Quantum Mechanics. R. P. Feynman The Feynman Lectures on Physics 15px 15px ] Category:Chemistry ar:كيمياء نظرية bn:তাত্ত্বিক রসায়ন ca:Química teòrica cs:Teoretická chemie de:Theoretische Chemie es:Química teórica eo:Teoria kemio fa:شیمی نظری fr:Chimie théorique ko:이론화학 id:Kimia teori it:Chimica teorica he:כימיה תאורטית lmo:Chímica teorica nl:Theoretische chemie ja:理論化学 no:Teoretisk kjemi pl:Chemia teoretyczna pt:Química teórica ru:Теоретическая химия simple:Theoretical chemistry sl:Teoretična kemija fi:Teoreettinen kemia sv:Teoretisk kemi uk:Теоретична хімія ur:نظریاتی کیمیاء zh:理论化学