Technology Transfer also called Transfer of Technology (TOT) and Technology Commercialisation, is the process of skill transferring, knowledge, technologies, methods of manufacturing, samples of manufacturing and facilities among government s or universities and other institutions to ensure that scientific and technological developments are accessible to a wider range of users who can then further develop and exploit the technology into new products, processes, applications, materials or services. It is closely related to (and may arguably be considered a subset of) knowledge transfer. Some also consider technology transfer as a process of moving promising research topics into a level of maturity ready for bulk manufacturing or production [ September 2011 ] Technology brokers are people who discovered how to bridge the disparate worlds and apply scientific concepts or processes to new situations or circumstances. { Hargadon, Andrew. &apos;&apos;Harvard Business School Working Knowledge for Business Leaders&apos;&apos;, August 4, 2003. } A related term, used almost synonymously, is &quot; technology valorisation &quot;. While conceptually the practice has been utilized for many years (in ancient times, Archimedes was notable for applying science to practical problems), the present-day volume of research, combined with high-profile failures at Xerox PARC and elsewhere [ February 2011 ], has led to a focus on the process itself. [ Transfer process ] Many companies, universities and governmental organizations now have an Office of Technology Transfer (TTO, also known as &quot; Tech Transfer &quot; or &quot; TechXfer &quot; ) dedicated to identifying research which has potential commercial interest and strategies for how to exploit it. For instance, a research result may be of scientific and commercial interest, but patent s are normally only issued for practical processes, and so someone—not necessarily the researchers—must come up with a specific practical process. Another consideration is commercial value; for example, while there are many ways to accomplish nuclear fusion, the ones of commercial value are those that generate more energy than they require to operate. The process to commercially exploit research varies widely. It can involve licensing agreements or setting up joint ventures and partnerships to share both the risks and rewards of bringing new technologies to market. Other corporate vehicles, e.g. spin-outs, are used where the host organization does not have the necessary will, resources or skills to develop a new technology. Often these approaches are associated with raising of venture capital (VC) as a means of funding the development process, a practice more common in the United States than in the European Union, which has a more conservative approach to VC funding. { EU Report on EU/global comparisons in the commercialisation of new technologies } Spinoffs are a popular vehicle of commercialisation in Canada, where the rate of licensing of Canadian university research remains far below that of the US. { State of The Nation 2008 - Canada&apos;s Science, Technology and Innovation System } Technology transfer offices may work on behalf of research institutions, governments and even large multinationals. Where start-ups and spin-outs are the clients, commercial fees are sometimes waived in lieu of an equity stake in the business. As a result of the potential complexity of the technology transfer process, technology transfer organizations are often multidisciplinary, including economists, engineers, lawyers, marketers and scientists. The dynamics of the technology transfer process has attracted attention in its own right, and there are several dedicated societies and journals. There has been a marked increase in technology transfer intermediaries specialized in their field since 1980, stimulated in large part by the Bayh-Dole Act and equivalent legislation in other countries, which provided additional incentives for research exploitation. [ Drawbacks ] Despite incentives to move research into production, the practical aspects are sometimes difficult to perform in practice. Using DoD Technology Readiness Level s as a criterion (for example), Research tends to focus on TRL 1-3, while readiness for production tends to focus on TRL 6-7 or higher. Bridging TRL-3 to TRL-6 has proven to be difficult in some organizations. Attempting to rush research (prototypes) into production (fully tested under diverse conditions, reliable, maintainable. etc.) tends to be more costly and time-consuming than expected. { http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d08467sp.pdf } [ See also ] Angel investor Association of University Technology Managers Bayh-Dole Act Business incubator Commercialization Diffusion of innovations Discovery (observation) Innovation Intellectual property Invention Licensing Executives Society International Open Innovation Patent Prior art Seed money Startup company Technology assessment Technology readiness level Value chain Venture capital [ Journals ] Comparative Technology Transfer and Society [ References ] [ External links ] [ Business/Opportunities/Inventions/Products_and_Services/Technology_Transfer_Offices Technology transfer offices ] Alliance for Commercialization of Canadian Technologies Special Report：Methodological and Technological issues in Technology Transfer ( IPCC ) The Journal of Technology Transfer TandemLaunch Primer on Technology Transfer for University Inventors Technology Transfer Systems in the United States and Germany: Lessons and Perspectives (1997) Category:Intellectual property law Category:Knowledge transfer bg:Трансфер на технологии de:Technologietransfer et:Tehnosiire es:Transferencia tecnológica fr:Transfert de technologie ko:기술이전 hi:प्रौद्योगिकी हस्तान्तरण lt:Technologijų perkėlimas pt:Transferência de tecnologia ro:Transfer de tehnologie ru:Трансфер технологий fi:Teknologiansiirto uk:Трансфер технологій war:Pagbalhin hin teknolohiya