[ April 2012 ] [ April 2012 April 2012 April 2012 ] [ Esquipulas Basilic of Esquipulas.jpg 300px Basilica de Esquipulas on January 14, 2005 - day before the annual holiday of Black Christ Shrine Guatemala bottom Location in Guatemala inline,title GT Country 25px Guatemala Department Chiquimula Department Imperial Ethnicities Religions 14 37 N 89 12 W ] Esquipulas is a town in the Guatemala n department of Chiquimula on the border with Honduras. It serves as the municipal seat for the surrounding municipality of the same name. The town is famous for the Basilica of Esquipulas which houses the Shrine of the Cristo Negro (“Black Christ”). [ History ] [ Conquest of Izquipulas ] In 1525 Juan Pérez Dardón captains, Sancho de Barahona and Bartolome Becerra under the command of Pedro de Alvarado conquered the province of Chiquimula de la Sierra, and consequently imposed the Catholic religion to the conquered peoples. In April 1530, the locals led by caciques Galel Copantl and again rose against the conquerors and as a result, Don Francisco de Orduna ordered the captains Pedro de Amalina and Hernando Chavez to march from Mitla to quell the rebellion in Esquipulas, who left with 60 infants, 400 Indian allies, and 30 horses. The city was well entrenched making it difficult to input the Spanish army, and after fighting for 3 days, the inhabitants of Esquipulas finally surrendered the city, more for peace and public tranquility, which for fear of the Castilian arms, in the words the boss. 1, 2[Edit] Foundation of the town of Esquipulas The town of Esquipulas was founded by the Spanish between 1560 and 1570, who coexisted peacefully with the Chorti people of the region. To start of the 18th century was one of the largest Spanish community in the book of baptisms with a population of 198 people. A century later, the Spanish community reached the 851 residents, this represents 30% of the total community of Esquipulas who were attracted to the region valles.2 fertility[Edit] Temple Basilica of Esquipulas to Category On April 16, 1961 the temple was located in the city as a basilica by a Bull of Pope John XXIII, the town also received city status Prelatic, and October 11, 1968 the village was elevated to city status.[Edit] Importance Religious &amp; Events Due to its religious importance as well as having hosted various events is known by various titles such as American Capital of faith, tripoint Headquarters and gateway to peace. I take great importance for the government of President Marco Vinicio Cerezo Arevalo, for hosting the meetings to create the Negotiating Framework Peace Accords, ending the internal conflict with the guerrillas, known as Esquipulas Esquipulas I and II. [ Peace Accords ] [ Background to the internal armed conflict ] With the signing of the peace agreement, a firm and lasting between the Government of the Republic of Guatemala and the URNG (December 29, 1996) ended the armed conflict that pitted the Guatemalans with dire consequences for the country both in damage to infrastructure such as loss of precious human lives and human rights violations of citizens. The extreme poverty that Guatemalan society has faced. The problems of illiteracy, lack of education, poor health care, lack of housing, the major agricultural problems, exclusion and marginalization of indigenous people, the fragmentation of society, and so on. The weakness of institutions. The dissatisfaction of some officers against the government of General Idígoras Fuentes gave rise to the internal armed conflict. For several years the command adamant that the chaotic situation that has dragged on without resolution and a process of modernization violently interrupted (1954) forced a group of Guatemalans to take up arms as a defense to the impossibility of political and democratic change. The State responded to this uprising with counterinsurgency, reaching the supermilitarización of society and to disburse large amounts of money to deal with the insurgencia.4 [ Efforts to achieve peace ] With the arrival of the government of Vinicio Cerezo (1986) had high hopes Guatemalans among them, achieving inner peace in the country. On August 7, 1987 signed the Esquipulas II agreement, and consequently established the National Reconciliation Commission, which had two major achievements: 1. The National Dialogue, which opened opportunities for participation in the civil sectors, and 2. Encourage the dialogue between the government and the URNG. In late 1989 a meeting is held preliminary talks between the government and the URNG, which managed to sign the Oslo Agreement which determined the purpose of the negotiations: to solve national problems by peaceful means and end internal armed conflict. Throughout 1990 followed a series of meetings between the command of the URNG and the various sectors of the country. The National Reconciliation Commission held meetings with El Escorial political parties, the Ottawa with the business sector, the Quito with the religious sector, the Metepec with the popular and trade union and Atlixco with the academic, university small and medium enterprises. [ Declaration of Esquipulas ] In May 1986 a meeting took place, &quot; Esquipulas I &quot;, which was attended by five Central American presidents. On February 5, 1987, President Oscar Arias of Costa Rica proposed a peace plan (the Plan Arias) which evolved from this meeting. During 1986 and 1987, he established the &quot; Esquipulas Process &quot;, in which heads of state of Central America agreed to an economic and a basic framework for the peaceful resolution of conflicts. Thus emerged the &quot; Esquipulas II &quot; and was signed in Guatemala City by the President of Costa Rica Oscar Arias, President Vinicio Cerezo of Guatemala, El Salvador&apos;s President Jose Napoleon Duarte, President of Nicaragua Daniel Ortega and Honduras President Jose Azcona Hoyo on August 7, 1987. 5[Edit] Agreement Esquipulas II The Esquipulas II Accord defined a number of measures to promote national reconciliation, the end of hostilities, democratization, free elections, the term of any assistance to irregular military forces, negotiations on arms control and assistance the refugees. It also laid the groundwork for international verification procedures and provided an agenda for implementación. { http://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acuerdo_de_Esquipulas } [ Beauty ] The maximum event is Miss beauty of Esquipulas Esquipulas. Formerly Señorita(Spanish) Esquipulas, even in 2009. &apos;&apos;&apos;Hania Hernández&apos;&apos;&apos;, the most prominent esquipulteca in beauty contests. [ Esquipulas Miss Contest Winners ] Miss Esquipulas 2011 Ana Belen Solis Miss Esquipulas 2010 Karol Lili Leiva Miss Esquipulas 2009 Vasquez Kristel Colindres Miss Esquipulas 2008 Gloria Maria Sandoval Miss Esquipulas 2007 Ivanna Bonilla Miss Esquipulas 2006 Maria Alejandra Aguilar Miss Esquipulas 2004 Hania Hernández [ Participation in Departmental beauty contests, national and international ] The esquipultecas have excelled in beauty pageants national and district levels and International.Winners of the contest Miss Chiquimula Esquipultecas [ Winners of the contest of Miss esquipultecas Chiquimula ] The winners of this competition represent the department of Chiquimula in Guatemala Election Miss Universe. Miss Chiquimula 2007 Ivanna Bonilla Miss Chiquimula 2005 &apos;&apos;&apos;Hania Hernández Miss Chiquimula 2010 Karol Lili Leiva Miss Chiquimula Mayan 2010 Miss Gandy Ramos [ Winners of the contests esquipultecas Miss Guatemala ] The winners of this competition represent the country in competitions Guatemalan admissions. Miss Guatemala International 2008 Ivanna Bonilla Miss Guatemala International 2002 Hania Hernández Miss Guatemala Mayan 2010 Gandy Ramos Miss Guatemala Picture 2006 Hania Hernández National Queen of the Festival of Independence Hania Hernández National Queen of the Independence Party is the second most important beauty contest in the country after only Miss Universe Guatemala. [ Esquipultecas winners in international competitions ] The winners of this contest will represent the country and won international encertamenes. The only two international competitions won by Esquipulas. Miss Mesoamerica 2010 Gandy Ramos Expoworld Miss Guatemala 2002 Hania Hernández [ Important People ] Marco Tulio Rivas, global soccer, attended the World SUB-20 Colombia of 2011, currently playing for the football team SUB-20 Guatemala. http://www.prensalibre.com/mundial_sub_20/Marco-Rivas-orgullo-Esquipulas_0_523747878.html Juan Pablo Espino, Guatemalan writer nationally recognized. http://www.esquipulas.com.gt/cultura/jpespinoville.htm Mario Salazar Grande, artist and painter known internationally for his paintings. http://www.esquipulas.com.gt/cultura/mario_elgrande.htm Milagro Acevedo, educator with a great international experience in the Montessori method. educator with a great international experience in the Montessori method. Hania Hernández, beauty queen, has won numerous contests nationally and internationally. http://www.esquipulas.com.gt/eventos/hania-hernandez-manchame-reina-nacional-de-independencia/88/ And a wide range of young people who annually earn at different stages of the National Science Olympiad conducted by the University of San Carlos de Guatemala http://olimpiada.ingenieria-usac.edu.gt/regional2009.htm [ Education ] 52% (27.664 inh.) Esquipulteca population is made up young from 0 to 25 years, which 64% (17.705) of that 52% (27.664) of young scholars. Education quality is high active Esquipulas, +89.0, the best quality education across the east. The Esquipulas educational calendar is 180 days, the dates may vary, the most common are from 18 January to 12 October (10 months) and a total of 90 days or 3 months off. 70% (12.393) study in private institutions that are several in Esquipulas, while only 30% (5.311) study in the public institutions of government. Esquipulas has stood massively in youth participation in National Science Olympiad in Guatemala, which is in charge of the University of San Carlos de Guatemala, taking several gold medals, silver and bronze as well as awards for part of the young participants. [ Winners esquipultecos in the ONC (USAC) ] Esquipultecos winners in the National Olympiad of Science (ONC) are various and Esquipulas has the largest share and the highest number of awards won. Participants go to various materials and are: mathematics, natural sciences, social sciences, chemistry, physics and biology major, degrees from 1 ° to 3 ° basic or secondary and diversified. { http://olimpiada.ingenieria-usac.edu.gt/regional2009.htm } [ Economy ] [ Tourism ] Because of its importance as a tourist and religious center, the population of Esquipulas is dedicated mostly to trade and is also strong coffee cultivation, producing mountains of the best varieties of the highest quality of existing coffee. Currently, religious tourism and hospitality industry has boomed, fueled by the large number of pilgrims visiting the sacred image of the Black Christ of Esquipulas. Also people who are visiting to buy a worm called Esquipulas Tokyo This is a worm multicolored colors: pink, yellow, purple, green and red. This put it on the buses that go to that place and when looking at a bus coming the Tokyo means of Esquipulas. [ Places in Esquipulas ] Tourism in Esquipulas has grown gradually, is a very attractive destination because of the abundant and varied natural beauty, abundant flora and fauna, its colonial history, as well as the whole culture expressed in its customs and cuisine. There is a strong interest of the international community and religious colonial places like the Basilica of Esquipulas was built in 1740 it was given by Monsignor Pedro Pardo de Figueroa (first Metropolitan Archbishop since 1744) in order to meet the increasingly fastest growing dedicated pilgrimages to the Black Christ of Esquipulas, commissioned the construction of a temple to Philip José de Porres, the son of Diego de Porres and grandson of Joseph de Porres, Antiguan renowned architects where you will find the cotton field where they came from the funds to pay for the sculpture. Some tourist destinations in Esquipulas 125px Basilica of Esquipulas Esquipulas City stone of the Compadres Esquipulas City Mine Cave Esquipulas City Reserva de la biosfera Trifinio Esquipulas Park Chatún Esquipulas Reserva de la Biosfera El Guisayote Esquipulas Acueducto Los Arcos Esquipulas City, Río Atulapa Ciudad de Esquipulas Esquipulas [ Basilica of Esquipulas ] In 1956, Pope Pius XII erected the Prelature nullius of Santo Cristo de Esquipulas, established by the municipality of Esquipulas and the Santuario de Esquipulas Cathedral as the venue. Also, the Archbishop of Guatemala, Monsignor Mariano Rossell y Arellano was appointed First Prelate of Esquipulas, who was concerned to seek a religious order to take over care of the sanctuary, finally finding support at the Benedictine Abbey of San José, located in Louisiana, USA. The order sent three monks in 1959 with the mission to Esquipulas founding the Benedictine Monastery of Esquipulas which is responsible for the care of the Basilica today. In 1961 Archbishop Rossell sent a request to the Blessed Pope John XXIII, who, based in religious, cultural and historic shrine of Esquipulas raised to the rank of Minor Basilica. [ Stone of the Compadres ] In strange balance have stood the test of time and historical earthquakes. There are small: the upper reaches the size of a regular sedan with four doors. Together they reach a height of about three meters and weighing 50 tons. [ The Legend ] That two friends became compadres in Esquipulas (a godfather to the son of another). And despite having made this agreement involving own risk and trust, the sponsor ended the boy&apos;s mother and carried away by desire. While the mother and the man at the place where the rocks, either alone, left to show their desire for each other, and between the whispering wind, swaying trees and being alone... attempted a sexual act. Legend has it that by betraying the honor of godfather and mother, being unfaithful to the trust placed in them, punishment became the two stone and standing as a reminder and warning of punishment received by his actions. [ Ceremonies and Rituals ] On the other hand, traditional communities believe they are a manifestation of divine powers, or materialization of divine will. So the place is scene sacred rituals, prayers, sacrifices and penances. They are already smoke blackened the rituals performed where the sacrifice is often the beheaded cock between candles.View of the Stone of the Compadres. [ Mine Cave ] The oral tradition dictates that it was in this place where Christ reveals the image of the famous sculptor Quirio Black Catano, creator of the famous statue venerated in Esquipulas. Are located south of the city right next to the Basilica and one kilometer away from the road leading to Honduras, there are some hills which one was drilled in a cross lying north to south in the more margins of the Rio Chacalapa or Miracles. It is said that many went through all these places in search of a mine that salvation was to finance the work of the Basilica, but finally, up and down and doing tests, the finding savior was found, began drilling and operating silver mine that was a fact, when they needed it s more like a miracle those deluded savior. These caves were like a memory of that silver mine, which by its geographical location near the Basilica, they found there has been attributed to the miraculous Christ of Esquipulas, which is not true because the documents were later found which consists reliable that the image was burilado by the architect in Antigua Guatemala Quirio Catano, however many indigenous pilgrims from the West, with a mixture of Christian faith and traditions or beliefs, come to visit these caves, performing their own rituals, burn pon and candles, even money left within them. [ Zoo ] Today those caves, were within private land, owned by a family of Esquipulas, who have taken advantage of the tourist value that they have and the influx of pilgrims as well as the river that runs through the place, for which they have installed The Ecological Park Cueva de las Minas, which has a zoo with more than 25 species, restaurant, basketball court and football Papi, a ranch and parking, charging an entry fee for tourists. [ Park Chatún ] Chatun is an Adventure and Fun Park, where all features are intended to show the diversity of our natural resources and our customs and traditions, based on two pillars: Adventure and Nature. [ Agriculture ] It also has advantages in agriculture, because that&apos;s coffee sertamenes Esquipulas has won several national and international as the best quality coffee and the richest of Guatemala, now there are two winners of these contests farm, Finca Finca Clouds and the Cascajal, according to the National Coffee Association ANACAFE(Spanish) coffee from Esquipulas to win the contest The Best Coffee in Guatemala and the World { http://www.esquipulas.com.gt/noticias/el-caf-de-esquipulas-famoso-a-nivel-mundial/1036/ } [ Political Division villages and hamlets ] The municipality of Esquipulas, Chiquimula is composed of 21 villages and 118 hamlets in its 532 km2, the city of Esquipulas also has 5 villages. Distance to the city in Kilometers. El Ciracil Tizaquín El Sillón Vuelta Grande San Joaquín [ Village Atulapa ] Montecinas Agua Caliente Amatal El Barrial La Casona Mesa Grande, Zompopero Bojorquez Agua Zarca Horno de Vides El Cerrón Canoas La Brea [ Village Santa Rosalia ] El Limón El Jocotal La Cuestona El Portezuelo El Duraznal Plan de La Arada Las Toreras [ Village San Nicolas ] El Cascajal Chaguitón Guayabito Miramundo El Barrial Tecomapa [ Village la Granadilla ] El Chuctal Floripundio El Olvido El Porvenir [ Village Olopita ] San Juan El Bueyero Olopita Centro Tontoles Las Crucitas Cuevitas San Cristobal Piedra Redonda [ Village Valle Dolores ] El Chorro San Juan Arriba El Chaguite Los Vados Tierra Colorada [ Village Belén (El Tablón) ] Agua Zarca Chiramay La Ruda El Zapote [ Village Cruz Alta ] Curruche Las palmas [ Village Jagua (Las Cañas) ] El Peñasco (Llano de la Muerte ) Lagunas Llano de Guerra Ojo de Agua Palmitas Tareas El Encino La Cumbre El Pinalito El Jicaro El Salitre Las Sopas Rincón de María San Francisco Buena Vista, El Empedrado. [ Village Las Peñas ] Joyas Verdes La Fortuna El Pesote Miramundo El Incienso El Palmar Queseras [ Village El Sarzal ] Potrerillos El Guineal Zapotal Zapotalito Malcotal [ Village Valle de Jesús ] Valle de Jesús [ Village San Isidro ] Malcotalito El Chuctal Entre Ríos Capucal [ Village Chanmagua ] Las Pozas Los Varales El Pedregal Laguna Seca [ Village Cafetales ] Loma Alta La Rinconada La Aradona Llano Largo [ Village el Carrizal ] Llano de los Toros Pericos Bailadero Tabloncito Joyitas [ Village Horcones ] Calzontes Piedra de Amolar Tablón de Gamez Tishac El Zarzalito [ Village Timushan ] El Mojón El Bajío San Antonio Sulay Malcinca San Miguel Mapa Suyate Pasaljá Tablón de Sulay Loma del Mango Los Fierros Llano de San Gaspar Cañada del Pino [ Village Monteros ] Caserío El Horno El Rincón de León [ Village Carboneras ] El Rincón [ The Cathedral ] The cathedral at Esquipulas was proclaimed a Basilica in 1961 by Pope John XXIII, and in 1995, celebrating the 400th anniversary of the shrine, Pope John Paul II proclaimed it &quot; the spiritual center of Central America. &quot; Every year, thousands of pilgrims from Guatemala, the United States, Mexico, Europe and other Central America n countries flock to pay homage to the dark wooden image of the crucified Christ, the most revered Catholic shrine in the region. { See Linda Kay Davidson and David Gitlitz ‘’Pilgrimage, from the Ganges to Graceland: an Encyclopedia’’ (Santa Barbara: ABC-CLIO, 2002), 173-75. } El Santuario de Chimayo, a major Roman Catholic pilgrimage site in Chimayó, New Mexico, USA, is closely linked with Esquipulas. [ Tierra Santa ] Esquipulas is famous for its Tierra Santa (Holy Earth) clay tablets that are purchased by the pilgrims during Church festivals. The clay from the local deposits is cleaned and pressed into small cakes. [ 10.3109/13880208009065197 ] Such clay is also known as tierra bendita, or Tierra del Santo. The popularity of this clay is attested by the many names (for example, akipula, cipula, askipula, kipula) that are used for such medicinal clay tablets all around Central America. Pilgrims sometimes eat the supposedly curative clay, or they rub themselves with it. Similar customs prevail at the sister shrine El Santuario de Chimayo in the US. In 1987 the Trifinio biosphere reserve was created to protect the unique flora and fauna in the region. [ References ] [ External links ] Official website Category:Municipalities of the Chiquimula Department Category:Populated places in Guatemala Category:Populated places established in the 1560s Category:Guatemala–Hondruas border crossings es:Esquipulas fr:Esquipulas it:Esquipulas (Guatemala) lt:Eskipulasas pt:Esquipulas