[ Betancur Cuartas ] [ yes 1923 02 04 ] { Amagá, } { Antioquia, } { Colombia } { Colombian } { Conservative } { Rosa Helena Álvarez Yepes } { Pontifical Bolivarian University } { Lawyer } { Roman Catholic } Belisario Betancur Cuartas (born on February 4, 1923) is a Colombia n statesman, who as a member of the Colombian Conservative Party was President of Colombia from 1982 to 1986. [ Biographic data ] Betancur was born in the vicinity of “el Morro de la Paila”, of the town of Amagá, Antioquia. His father, Rosendo Betancur, was a blue-collar worker at the textile company Coltejer, job that he obtained after having spent most of his life transporting goods by mule through the mountains of Antioquia. His mother, Ana Otilia Cuartas, had a small shop in Amagá. She died in 1950. { Arismendi Posada, Ignacio; Gobernantes Colombianos; trans. Colombian Presidents; Interprint Editors Ltd., Italgraf, Segunda Edición; Page 255; Bogotá, Colombia; 1983 } [ Early life ] Betancur started his education in the public school of Amagá. He later transferred to the seminary “Misiones de Yarumal’’, where he studied for the priesthood. He was dismissed from the seminary for disciplinary matters. Betancur then traveled to the city of Medellín, where he enrolled in the Universidad Pontificia Bolivariana. There, he excelled in his studies and obtained exceptional grades. Upon completing his high-school education, the Headmaster of the school, Monsignor Manuel José Sierra, granted him a scholarship to complete his higher education. In 1955, Betancur graduated in jurisprudence and obtained a Law and Economics degree. [ Political career ] He began his political career as a Deputy to the Assembly of the Colombian province of Antioquia, where he served form 1945 to 1947. He also served as a Representative to the National Chamber for the departments of Cundinamarca and Antioquia, and was a member of the National Constituent Assembly from 1953 to 1957. Betancur was the Minister of Labor in 1963 and Ambassador of Colombia to Spain from 1975 to 1977. He ran as the Conservative presidential candidate in 1978, but was defeated by Julio César Turbay Ayala. [ Presidency ] In 1982 he was elected President of the Republic and served until 1986. As President, he began the Grupo de Contadora por la Paz en Centroamérica, began democratic reforms by incorporating the principal armed movements into civil life, promoted low-cost housing and open universities, began a literacy campaign and endorsed tax amnesty. During his term, the government approved the mayoral election law, municipal and departmental reforms, judicial and congressional reforms, the television statute, the federal holiday law, and the new Código Contencioso Administrativo. His administration began the exploration and export of coal in the Cerrejón North region and the broadcast of the regional television channels Teleantioquia and Telecaribe. Betancur is also noted for his attempts to bring peace to his country. During his administration he initiated peace talks with several Colombian guerrilla groups. The controversial Palace of Justice siege occurred in late 1985, less than a year before the end of his presidential term. [ Post-Presidency ] Betancur is currently the Vice-president of the Club of Rome for Latin America, President of the Commission for Truth in the Salvadoran peace process, President of the Pan American Health Organization in Washington, and President of the Santillana for Latin America Foundation in Bogotá. He is also a founding member of the Pontifical Academy of Social Sciences. Betancur is a member of the Club of Madrid, an independent non-profit organization composed of 81 democratic former Presidents and Prime Ministers from 57 different countries. { The Club of Madrid is an independent non-profit organization composed of 81 democratic former Presidents and Prime Ministers from 57 different countries. It constitutes the world´s largest forum of former Heads of State and Government, who have come together to respond to a growing demand for support among leaders in democratic leadership, governance, crisis and post-crisis situations. All lines of work share the common goal of building functional and inclusive societies, where the leadership experience of our Members is most valuable. } [ Honors ] Betancur is the recipient of an honorary doctorate from the Universities of Colorado and Georgetown, and the Prince of Asturias Peace Award (Spain). He is the author of numerous books and a member of the Colombian Academies of History, Jurisprudence and Language. [ Notes ] [ talks ] [ Why did the Colombia Peace Process Fail? The Tabula Rasa Institute http://www.trinstitute.org/ojpcr/5_1azcarate.pdf 2006-02-26 PDF ] [PDF file] [ References ] [ External links ] Biography by CIDOB Foundation Betancur&apos;s page at the Pontifical Academy of Social Sciences [ Betancur Cuartas, Belisario Betancur, Belisario Former President of Colombia 4 February 1923 Amagá, Antioquia, Colombia ] Category:1923 births Category:Living people Category:People from Antioquia Department Category:Pontifical Bolivarian University alumni Category:Colombian journalists Category:Colombian lawyers Category:Colombian writers Category:Colombian Conservative Party politicians Category:Ambassadors of Colombia to Spain Category:Presidents of Colombia Category:Members of the Pontifical Academy of Social Sciences ca:Belisario Betancur Cuartas de:Belisario Betancur et:Belisario Betancur Cuartas es:Belisario Betancur eu:Belisario Betancur fr:Belisario Betancur Cuartas gl:Belisario Betancur Cuartas io:Belisario Betancur Cuartas la:Belisarius Betancur no:Belisario Betancur oc:Belisario Betancur Cuartas pt:Belisario Betancur ru:Бетанкур Куартас, Белисарио sl:Belisario Betancur fi:Belisario Betancur yo:Belisario Betancur zh:贝利萨里奥·贝坦库尔·夸尔塔斯