{ NOTOC } [ Yellow Wagtail Yellow_wagtail.jpg 240px Adult male Blue-headed Wagtail (M. f. flava) LC IUCN3.1 Animal ia Chordata Aves Passeriformes Motacillidae Motacilla M. flava Motacilla flava Linnaeus, 1758 Subspecies Some 15-20, but see text Motacilla tschutschensis(but see text ) ] The Yellow Wagtail (Motacilla flava) is a small passerine in the wagtail family Motacillidae, which also includes the pipit s and longclaw s. This species breeds in much of temperate Europe and Asia and has a foothold in North America in Alaska. It is resident in the milder parts of its range, such as western Europe, but northern and eastern populations migrate to Africa and south Asia. The Beringia n population winters further down the Pacific coast. Immature Blue-headed Wagtail (&apos;&apos;M. f. flava&apos;&apos;) Vagrant individuals occur around the winter quarters at migration time. For example, on Palau in Micronesia migrant flocks of this species – apparently of the Bering Sea Yellow Wagtail, and including many adult males – are regularly seen, while further north on the Marianas, only the occasional stray individual – usually females or immatures as it seems – is encountered. { Wiles et al. (2000), VanderWerf et al. (2006) } It is a slender 15–16  cm long bird, with the characteristic long, constantly wagging tail of its genus. It is the shortest tailed of the European wagtails. The breeding adult male is basically olive above and yellow below. In other plumages, the yellow may be diluted by white. The heads of breeding males come in a variety of colours and patterns depending on subspecies. The call is a characteristic high-pitched jeet. { Wiles et al. (2000) } This insectivorous bird inhabits open country near water, such as wet meadows. It nests in tussocks, laying 4-8 speckled eggs. [ Systematics ] This species&apos; systematics and phylogeny is extremely confusing. Literally dozens of subspecies have been described at one time or another, and some 15-20 are currently considered valid depending on which author reviews them. In addition, the Citrine Wagtail (M. citreola) forms a cryptic species complex with this bird; { Voelker (2002) } both taxa as conventionally delimited are paraphyletic in respect to each other. The populations of the Beringia n region are sometimes separated as Eastern Yellow Wagtail (M. tschutschensis). Currently accepted subspecies: { After Tyler (2005) } Coloration refers to males except when noted. Adult female (above) and male Blue-headed Wagtails (&apos;&apos;M. f. flava&apos;&apos;) Adult male Yellow-crowned Wagtail (&apos;&apos;M. f. flavissima&apos;&apos;) { Kolkata ( } { West Bengal, } { India ) } { Hodal, } { Faridabad district ( } { Haryana, India) } Adult female Turkestan Black-headed Wagtail (&apos;&apos;M. f. melanogrisea&apos;&apos;) wintering in Kolkata (West Bengal, India) M. f. flava Linnaeus, 1758 – Blue-headed Wagtail. Blue-gray head with white supercilium and malar stripe in males, much washed with buff ish green in females. Breeding: S Scandinavia to France and C European mountain ranges, E to Urals. Winter: sub-Saharan Africa. M. f. flavissima Blyth, 1834 – Yellow-crowned Wagtail. Yellow-green head with a brighter yellow supercilium. Females markedly paler below than males. Breeding: Britain and English Channel coast. Winter: Africa. M. f. thunbergi Billberg, 1828 - Dark-headed Wagtail or Grey-headed Wagtail. Head dark gray, reaching down to the cheeks, and without white in males; lighter and washed greenish, with vestigial greenish supercilium in females. Breeding: C and N Scandinavia E to NW Siberia. Winter: E Africa, India n subcontinent, Southeast Asia. M. f. iberiae Hartert, 1921 – Iberian Yellow Wagtail. Like flava, but throat white and gray darker, almost black behind eyes. Breeding: SE France, Iberia, Maghreb from Tunisia to Banc d&apos;Arguin. Winter: The Gambia to CAR. M. f. cinereocapilla Savi, 1831 – Ashy-headed Wagtail. Like iberiae but supercilium absent or vestigial. Breeding: Sicily, Sardinia, Italy, Slovenia. Winter: coastal Tunisia and Algeria, Mali to Lake Chad. M. f. pygmaea (A. E. Brehm, 1854) – Egyptian Yellow Wagtail. Similar to cinereocapilla, smaller, less bright. Nile delta and lower Nile, resident all year. M. f. feldegg Michahelles, 1830 – Black-headed Wagtail Like thunbergi but black cap in males, females like a dull thunbergi male above, very washed-out dirty yellowish below, throat white. Breeding: Balkans E to Caspian Sea, S to Turkey, Iran and Afghanistan; also Levant. Winter: C Africa from Nigeria to Uganda and S Sudan. M. f. lutea (S. G. Gmelin, 1774) – Yellow-headed Wagtail. Head yellow with green neck in males, females like a somewhat more vivid flava female. Breeding: Lower Volga to Irtysh River and Lake Zaysan. Winter: Africa and Indian subcontinent. M. f. beema (Sykes, 1832) – Sykes&apos; Wagtail. Like flava but head lighter gray, ears washed white; sexes often similar. Breeding: North of lutea, E to Ladakh area. Winter: Indian subcontinent, also E Africa and adjacent Arabia. M. f. melanogrisea (Homeyer, 1878) – Turkestan Black-headed Wagtail. Similar to feldegg, but white malar stripe and sometimes green neck. Breeding: Volga Delta E around Caspian Sea to N Afghanistan. Winter: Pakistan and NW India to W Nepal, possibly also NE Africa. M. f. plexa (Thayer &amp; Bangs, 1914) – North Siberian Yellow Wagtail. Males like thunbergi but ears darker, top of head lighter, vestigial supercilium. Females like dull males. Breeding: Siberia between Khatanga and Kolyma River s. Winter: India, SE Asia. M. f. tschutschensis J. F. Gmelin, 1789 – Beringian Yellow Wagtail, Alaska Yellow Wagtail, or Eastern Yellow Wagtail. Both sexes similar to corresponding flava, but gray of head darker; females often very male-like. Breeding: around Bering Strait to NW Canada coast. Winter: regions around South China Sea. M. f. angarensis (Sushkin, 1925) – South Siberian Yellow Wagtail. Males like plexa, but supercilium more pronounced. Breeding: From S Siberia S through W Transbaikalia to N Mongolia. Winter: SE Asia. M. f. leucocephala (Przevalski, 1887) – White-headed Yellow Wagtail. Male like flava, but grey of head very pale, almost white. Female like flava females, but head somewhat darker. Breeding: NW Mongolia and adjacent PRC and Russia. Winter: probably India. M. f. taivana (Swinhoe, 1863) – Green-crowned Yellow Wagtail or Kuril Yellow Wagtail. Like flavissima but daker above, ears much darker, almost black. Sexes similar. Breeding: between ranges of plexa and tschutschensis S via Sakhalin to N Hokkaidō. Winter: Myanmar to Taiwan, S to Wallacea. M. f. macronyx (Stresemann, 1920) – Southeast Siberian Yellow Wagtail. Males like thunbergi but brighter and more strongly marked overall. Female like in thunbergi but no supercilium. Breeding: SE Transbaikalia E to coast, S to Manchuria. Winter: NW of South China Sea. M. f. simillima Hartert, 1905 – Bering Sea Yellow Wagtail or Short-tailed Grey-headed Wagtail. Both sexes similar to corresponding flava, but supercilium usually less pronounced. Breeding: Kamchatka and Bering Sea islands, possibly to Aleuts. Winter: SE Asia S to N Australia. Nominate Blue-headed Wagtail and Yellow Wagtail form a narrow hybrid zone in northern France. Birds from this zone vary in appearance, but one type, which resembles nominate Blue-headed Wagtail (except that the blue tones to the head are paler and more mauve and the white of the head is more extensive, particularly on the throat, ear-coverts, and supercilium) is colloquially referred to as Channel Wagtail. [ Footnotes ] [ References ] [ BirdLife International (BLI) 2008 149141 Motacilla flava 2 January 2009 ] Tyler, Stephanie J. (2004): 60. Yellow Wagtail. In: del Hoyo, Josep; Elliott, Andrew &amp; Christie, D. (eds.): Handbook of Birds of the World (Vol. 9: Cotingas to Pipits and Wagtails): 781-782, plate 77. Lynx Edicions, Barcelona. ISBN 84-87334-69-5. Plate 77 image (all birds except the 4 grey/black-backed ones at lower left are M. flava) VanderWerf, Eric A.; Wiles, Gary J.; Marshall, Ann P. &amp; Knecht, Melia (2006): Observations of migrants and other birds in Palau, April–May 2005, including the first Micronesian record of a Richard&apos;s Pipit. Micronesica 39(1): 11-29. PDF fulltext Voelker, Gary (2002): Systematics and historical biogeography of wagtails: Dispersal versus vicariance revisited. Condor 104(4): 725–739. [English with Spanish abstract] DOI : 10.1650/0010-5422(2002)104[0725:SAHBOW]2.0.CO;2 HTML abstract Wiles, Gary J.; Worthington, David J.; Beck, Robert E. Jr.; Pratt, H. Douglas; Aguon, Celestino F. &amp; Pyle, Robert L. (2000): Noteworthy Bird Records for Micronesia, with a Summary of Raptor Sightings in the Mariana Islands, 1988-1999. Micronesica 32(2): 257-284. PDF fulltext [ External links ] [ Motacilla flava ] Ageing and sexing (PDF) by Javier Blasco-Zumeta Oiseaux Images Category:Birds of the United States Category:Birds of Africa Category:Birds of Asia Category:Birds of Pakistan Category:Birds of India Category:Birds of Europe Category:Birds of Turkey Category:Birds of Kenya Category:Birds of Palestine Category:Motacilla Category:Birds of Western Australia Category:Birds of Thailand Category:Birds of Western Sahara kbd:МывэкӀэпысгъуэжь ar:صعوة ba:Һары сәпсек bg:Жълта стърчиопашка br:Kannerez velen ca:Cuereta groga cv:Сарă пăрчăкан cs:Konipas luční cy:Siglen Felen da:Gul vipstjert de:Schafstelze et:Hänilane es:Motacilla flava eo:Flava motacilo eu:Larre-buztanikara fa:صعوه fo:Gulerla fr:Bergeronnette printanière fy:Giel Boumantsje hy:Դեղին խաղտտնիկ it:Motacilla flava he:נחליאלי צהוב ku:Dûverzînk la:Motacilla flava lt:Geltonoji kielė hu:Sárga billegető ms:Burung Pipit Kuning mn:Шар цэгцгий nl:Gele kwikstaart ja:ツメナガセキレイ frr:Güülbük no:Gulerle nn:Gulerle pcd:Lonjqheue pl:Pliszka żółta pt:Alvéola-amarela rue:Жовта плиска ru:Жёлтая трясогузка sah:Араҕас сылгычыай se:Fiskesbeštor scn:Pìspisa fi:Keltavästäräkki sv:Gulärla tr:Sarı kuyruksallayan udm:Ӵуж йӧгылтӥсь uk:Плиска жовта zh:黄鹡鸰