This is a list of musical terms that are likely to be encountered in printed scores, music reviews, and program notes. Most of the terms are Italian (see also Italian musical terms used in English ), in accordance with the Italian origins of many European musical conventions. Sometimes, the special musical meanings of these phrases differ from the original or current Italian meanings. Most of the other terms are taken from French and German, indicated by &quot; (Fr) &quot; and &quot; (Ger) &quot;, respectively. Others are from languages such as Latin and Spanish. Unless specified, the terms are Italian or English. The list can never be complete: some terms are common, and others are used only occasionally, and new ones are coined from time to time. Some composers prefer terms from their own language rather than the standard terms here. For a list of terms used in jazz, country, rock, and other popular music genres, see the Glossary of jazz and popular musical terms. [ yes References yes ] [ A ] [ accelerando ] [ a due ] [ affrettando ] [ arpeggio ] a, à (Fr): at, to, by, for, in, in the style of... a 2: see a due in this list a battuta: return to normal tempo after a deviation; same as &apos;a tempo&apos; abbandonatamente, con abbandono: free, relaxed aber (Ger): but a bene placito: up to the performer a cappella : in the manner of singing in a chapel; i.e., without instrumental accompaniment accarezzévole : expressive and caressing accelerando, accel.: accelerating; gradually increasing the tempo accent: emphasize, make a particular part more important accentato/accentuato: accented; with emphasis acceso: ignited, on fire acciaccato: broken down, crushed; the sounding of the notes of a chord not quite simultaneously, but from bottom to top. acciaccatura : crushing; i.e., a very fast grace note that is &quot; crushed &quot; against the note that follows and takes up no value in the measure accompagnato: accompanied; i.e., with the accompaniment following the soloist, who may speed up or slow down at will adagietto: rather slow adagio: at ease; i.e., play slowly adagissimo: very, very slow ad libitum (commonly ad lib; Latin): at liberty; i.e., the speed and manner of execution are left to the performer a due : intended as a duet; for two voices or instruments; together; two instruments are to play in unison after a solo passage for one of the instruments affannato, affannoso: anguished affettuoso, affettuosamente, or affectueusement (Fr): with affect (that is, with emotion); see also con affetto affrettando: hurrying, pressing onwards agile: swiftly agitato: agitated al, alla: to the, in the manner of (al before masculine nouns, alla before feminine) alla breve: in cut-time; two beats per measure or the equivalent thereof alla marcia: in the style of a march allargando: broadening, becoming a little slower each time allegretto: a little lively, moderately fast allegretto vivace: a moderately quick tempo allegrezza: cheerfulness, joyfulness allegro: cheerful or brisk; but commonly interpreted as lively, fast allegrissimo: very fast, though slower than presto all&apos; ottava: &quot; at the octave &quot;, see ottava als (Ger): than alt (English) (also alt dom or altered dominant): a jazz term which instructs chord-playing musicians such as a jazz pianist or jazz guitarist to perform a dominant (V7) chord with altered upper extensions (e.g., sharp 11th, flat 13th, etc.). altissimo: very high alto: high; often refers to a particular range of voice, higher than a tenor but lower than a soprano alzate sordini: lift or raise the mutes; i.e., remove mutes am Steg (Ger): at the bridge; i.e., playing a bowed string instrument near its bridge, which produces a heavier, stronger tone (see sul ponticello in this list) amabile: amiable, pleasant amoroso: loving anacrusis : a note or notes that precede the first full bar; a pickup andamento : used to refer to a fugue subject of above-average length andante: at a walking pace; i.e., at a moderate tempo andantino: slightly faster than andante (but earlier it is sometimes used to mean slightly slower than andante) ängstlich (Ger.): anxiously a niente: to nothing; an indication to make a diminuendo which fades to pppp a nessuna cosa: to nothing; an indication to hold a fermata until it dies away (this only works with instruments which cannot sustain a note) anima: feeling animandosi: animated, lively animato: animated, lively antiphon : a liturgical or other composition consisting of choral responses, sometimes between two choirs; a passage of this nature forming part of another composition; a repeated passage in a psalm or other liturgical piece, similar to a refrain. Collins Music Encyclopedia, 1959. apaisé (Fr): calmed a piacere: at pleasure; i.e., the performer need not follow the rhythm strictly, for example in a cadenza appassionato: passionately appoggiatura also called a &quot; leaning note &quot; : one or more grace note s that take up some note value of the next full note. a prima vista: Sight-read (lit. &quot; at first sight &quot; ); i.e., (to be) played or sung from written notation but without prior review of the written material arco : the bow used for playing some string instrument; i.e., played with the bow, as opposed to pizzicato (plucked), in music for bowed instruments; normally used to cancel a pizzicato direction arietta : a short aria arioso : airy, or like an air (a melody); i.e., in the manner of an aria; melodious armonioso: harmoniously arpeggio : like a harp; i.e., the notes of the chords are to be played quickly one after another (usually ascending) instead of simultaneously. In music for piano, this is sometimes a solution in playing a wide-ranging chord whose notes cannot be played otherwise. Arpeggios are frequently used as an accompaniment. See also broken chord in this list. arpeggiato : a way of playing a chord: starting with the lowest note, and with successively higher notes rapidly joining in. Sometimes the effect is reversed, so that the highest note is played first. assai: very assez (Fr): enough, sufficiently a tempo: in time; i.e., the performer should return to the main tempo of the piece (after an accelerando or ritardando, etc.); also may be found in combination with other terms such as a tempo giusto (in strict time) or a tempo di menuetto (at the speed of a minuet) attacca: attack or attach; go straight on; i.e., at the end of a movement, a direction to attach the next movement to the previous one, without a gap or pause Ausdruck (Ger): expression ausdrucksvoll/mit Ausdruck(Ger): expressively, with expression avec (Fr): with or with another [ B ] [ bocca chiusa ] [ broken chord ] B: German for B flat (also in Swedish, Finnish, Icelandic and Danish ); H in German is B natural barbaro: barbarous (notably used in Allegro barbaro by Béla Bartók ) Bartók pizzicato: a term which instructs string performers to play a pizzicato note to pull the string away from the fingerboard so that it snaps back percussively on the fingerboard. bass : the lowest of the standard four voice ranges (bass, tenor, alto, soprano); the lowest melodic line in a musical composition, often thought of as defining and supporting the harmony; in an orchestral context, the term usually refers to the double bass. basso continuo : continuous bass; i.e., a bass part played continuously throughout a piece to give harmonic structure, used especially in the Baroque period battement (Fr.): used in the 17th-century to refer to ornaments consisting of two adjacent notes, such as trills or mordents beat: (1) the pronounced rhythm of music; (2) one single stroke of a rhythm ic accent bellicoso: warlike, aggressive ben or bene: well; in ben marcato ( &quot; well marked &quot; ) for example bend: jazz term referring either to establishing a pitch, sliding down half a step and returning to the original pitch or sliding up half a step from the original note. beschleunigte (Ger): accelerated, as in mit beschleunigter Geschwindigkeit, at an accelerated tempo bewegt (Ger): moved, with speed binary : a musical form in two sections: AB bird&apos;s eye: a slang term for fermata, which instructs the performer to hold a note or chord as long as they wish bis (Lat): twice; i.e., repeat the relevant action or passage bisbigliando: whispering; i.e., a special tremolo effect on the harp where a chord or note is rapidly repeated at a low volume bocca chiusa : with closed mouth bravura: boldness; as in con bravura, boldly breit (Ger): broad bridge: Transitional passage connecting two sections of a composition, also transition. Also the part of a stringed instrument that holds the strings in place and transmits their vibrations to the resonant body of the instrument. brillante: brilliantly, with sparkle brio: vigour; usually in con brio brioso: vigorously (same as con brio) broken chord: A chord in which the notes are not all played at once, but in some more or less consistent sequence. They may follow singly one after the other, or two notes may be immediately followed by another two, for example. See also arpeggio in this list, which as an accompaniment pattern may be seen as a kind of broken chord; see Alberti bass. bruscamente: brusquely [ C ] [ capo ] Capo : a key-changing device for guitars and banjos; head; i.e. the beginning (of a movement, normally). { capriccioso: capriciously, unpredictable, volatile } { cédez (Fr): yield, give way } { cesura or caesura (Latin form): break, stop; i.e., a complete break in sound (sometimes nicknamed &quot; railroad tracks &quot; in reference to their appearance) } { chiuso: closed; i.e., muted by hand (for a horn, or similar instrument; but see also } { bocca chiusa, which uses the feminine form, in this list) } { coda : a tail; i.e., a closing section appended to a movement } { codetta : a small coda, but usually applied to a passage appended to a section of a movement, not to a whole movement } { col, colla } [ col colla ] { : with the (col before a masculine noun, colla before a feminine noun); (see next for example) } [ colla parte ] { colla parte: with the soloist; as an instruction in an orchestral score or part, it instructs the conductor or orchestral musician to follow the rhythm and tempo of a solo performer (usually for a short passage) } { colla voce: with the voice; as an instruction in a choral music/opera score or orchestral part, it instructs the conductor or orchestral musician to follow the rhythm and tempo of a solo singer (usually for a short passage) } { col legno : with the wood; i.e., the strings (for example, of a } { violin ) are to be struck with the wood of the bow, making a percussive sound; also battuta col legno: beaten with the wood } { coloratura : coloration; i.e., elaborate ornamentation of a vocal line, or (especially) a soprano voice that is well-suited to such elaboration } { colossale : tremendously } { col pugno: with the fist; i.e., bang the piano with the fist } { come prima: like the first (time); i.e., as before, typically referring to an earlier tempo } { come sopra: as above; i.e., like the previous tempo (usually) } { common time : the } { time signature 4/4: four beats per measure, each beat a } { quarter note (a crotchet) in length. 4/4 is often written on the } { musical staff as } [ common-time ] {. The symbol is not a C as an abbreviation for common time, but a broken circle; the full circle at one time stood for triple time, 3/4. } { comodo (or, commonly but less correctly, commodo): comfortable; i.e., at moderate speed; also, allegro comodo, tempo comodo, etc. } { con: with; used in very many musical directions, for example con allegrezza (with liveliness), con amore (with tenderness); (see also } { col, } { colla, above) } { con affetto } [ con affetto ] { : with } { affect (that is, with emotion) } { con amore, or (in Spanish and sometimes in Italian) con amor: with love, tenderly } { con anima: with feeling } { con brio: with spirit, with vigour } { con dolore: with sadness } { con forza: with force } { con (gran, molto) espressione: with (great, much) expression } { con fuoco: with fire, in a fiery manner } { con larghezza: with broadness; broadly } { con moto: with motion } { con somma passione: with great passion } { con slancio: with enthusiasm } { con spirito: with spirit; with feeling } { con sordina, or con sordine (plural) } [ con sordina ] { : with a } { mute, or with mutes; several orchestral instruments can have their tone muted with wood, rubber, metal, or plastic devices (for string instruments, mutes are clipped to the bridge, and for brass instruments, mutes are inserted in the bell); compare senza sordina in this list (which instructs the musicians to remove their mutes); see also } { Sordino. Note: sordina, with plural sordine, is strictly correct Italian, but the forms con sordino and con sordini are much more commonly used as terms in music. } { con sordino, or con sordini (plural) (incorrect Italian): see con sordina, above } { con variazioni: with variations/changes } { conjunct : an adjective applied to a } { melodic line that moves by step ( } { intervals of a 2nd) rather in disjunct motion (by leap). } { contralto: } { contrapuntalism : see } { counterpoint } { coperti (plural of coperto, which may also be seen): covered; i.e., on a drum, muted with a cloth } { crescendo : growing; i.e., progressively louder (contrast } { diminuendo ) } { cuivré: brassy. Used almost exclusively as a } { French Horn technique to indicate a forced, rough tone. A note marked both stopped and loud will be cuivré automatically } { cut time : Same as the } { meter 2/2: two half-note (minim) beats per measure. Notated and executed like } { common time (4/4), except with the beat lengths doubled. Indicated by } [ cut-time ] {. This comes from a literal cut of the } [ common-time ] { symbol of } { common time. Thus, a } { quarter note in cut time is only half a beat long, and a measure has only two beats. See also } { alla breve. } [ D ] [ decrescendo ] [ deest desunt ] [ divisi ] [ Dur ] da capo: from the head; i.e., from the beginning (see capo in this list) D.S.: Dal Segno, from the sign ( 12px ) D.S. al fine or dal segno al fine: from the sign to the end; i.e., return to a place in the music designated by the sign Segno and continue to the end of the piece D.S.S. al coda or dal segno al coda: same as D.S. al coda, but with a double segno D.S.S. al fine or dal segno al fine: from the double sign to the end; i.e., return to place in the music designated by the double sign (see D.S. al coda) and continue to the end of the piece deciso: decisively decelerando: slowing down; decelerating; opposite of accelerando (same as ritardando or rallentando) decrescendo or decresc.: same as diminuendo or dim. (see below) deest: from the Latin deesse meaning absent; placed after a catalogue abbreviation to indicate that this particular work does not appear in it. About the word deest The plural,desunt is used when referring to several works. delicatamente or delicato: delicately detaché: act of playing notes separately devoto: religiously diminuendo, dim.: dwindling; i.e., with gradually decreasing volume (same as decrescendo) disjunct : an adjective applied to a melodic line which moves by leap ( intervals of more than a 2nd) as opposed to conjunct motion (by step) dissonante: dissonant divisi or div.: divided; i.e., in a part in which several musicians normally play exactly the same notes they are instead to split the playing of the written simultaneous notes among themselves. It is most often used for string instruments, since with them another means of execution is often possible. (The return from divisi is marked unisono : see in this list.) doit: jazz term referring to a note that slides to an indefinite pitch chromatically upwards. dolce: sweetly dolcissimo: very sweetly dolente: sorrowfully, plaintively dolore: pain, distress, sorow, grief doloroso: sorrowfully, plaintively doppio movimento: twice as fast double stop : the act of playing two notes simultaneously on a melodic percussion instrument or string instrument downtempo: a slow, moody, or decreased tempo or played or done in such a tempo. It also refers to a genre of electronic music based on this ( downtempo ). drammatico: dramatically drop: jazz term referring to a note that slides to an indefinite pitch chromatically downwards. Dur (Ger) : major; used in key signature s as, for example, A-Dur ( A major ), B-Dur ( B b major ), or H-Dur ( B major ). (See also Moll (minor) in this list.) duolo: (Ital) grief dumpf (Ger): dull dynamics : the relative volume in the execution of a piece of music [ E ] e (Ital), or ed (Ital - used before vowels): and eco: the Italian word for &quot; echo &quot;; an effect in which a group of notes is repeated, usually more softly, and perhaps at a different octave, to create an echo effect ein wenig (Ger): a little Empfindung (Ger): feeling encore (Fr): again; i.e., perform the relevant passage once more en dehors (Fr): prominently energico: energetic, strong enfatico: emphatically en pressant (Fr): hurrying forward en retenant (Fr): slowing eroico: heroically espansivo: effusive; excessive in emotional expression; gushy. espirando: expiring; i.e., dying away espressione: expressively espressivo or espr.: expressively estinto: extinct, extinguished; i.e., as soft as possible, lifeless, barely audible etwas (Ger): somewhat [ F ] [ b ] [ fortissimo ] facile: easily, without fuss fall: jazz term describing a note of definite pitch sliding downwards to another note of definite pitch. falsetto : vocal register above the normal voice fermata : finished, closed; i.e., a rest or note is to be held for a duration that is at the discretion of the performer or conductor (sometimes called bird&apos;s eye); a fermata at the end of a first or intermediate movement or section is usually moderately prolonged, but the final fermata of a symphony may be prolonged for twice its printed length or more for dramatic effect. feroce: ferociously feurig (Ger): fiery festivamente: cheerfully, celebratory fieramente: proudly fill (English): a jazz or rock term which instructs performers to improvise a scalar passage or riff to &quot; fill in &quot; the brief time between lyrical phrase s, the lines of melody, or between two sections fine: the end, often in phrases like al fine (to the end) flat: a symbol ( ) that lowers the pitch of a note by a semitone. The term may also be used as an adjective to describe a situation where a singer or musician is performing a note in which the intonation is an eighth or a quarter of a semitone too low. flautando (may also appear as flautendo): flutelike; used especially for string instruments to indicate a light, rapid bowing over the fingerboard flebile: mournfully focoso or fuocoso: fiery; i.e., passionately forte or f (usually): strong; i.e., to be played or sung loudly fortepiano or fp (usually): strong-gentle; i.e., 1. loud, then immediately soft (see dynamics ), or 2. an early pianoforte fortissimo or ff: very loud (see note at pianissimo in this list) fortississimo or fff: as loud as possible forza : musical force forzando or fz: see sforzando in this list freddo: cold(ly); hence depressive, unemotional fresco: freshly fröhlich: lively, joyfully fugue (Fr), fuga (Latin and Italian): literally &quot; flight &quot;; hence a complex and highly regimented contrapuntal form in music. A short theme (the subject) is introduced in one voice (or part) alone, then in others, with imitation and characteristic development as the piece progresses. funebre: funeral; often seen as marcia funebre (funeral march), indicating a stately and plodding tempo. fuoco: fire; con fuoco means with fire furia: fury furioso: furiously [ G ] [ April 2012 ] G.P.: Grand Pause, General Pause; indicates to the performers that the entire ensemble has a rest of indeterminate length, often as a dramatic effect during a loud section gaudioso: with joy gemendo: groaningly gentile: gently geschwind (Ger): quickly geteilt (Ger): See divisi getragen (Ger): sustained giocoso or gioioso: gaily giusto: strictly, exactly, e.g. tempo giusto in strict time glissando (simulated Italian ): a continuous sliding from one pitch to another (a true glissando), or an incidental scale executed while moving from one melodic note to another (an effective glissando). See glissando for further information; and compare portamento in this list. grandioso: grandly grave: slowly and seriously grazioso: gracefully gustoso: with happy emphasis and forcefulness [ H ] H: German for B natural; B in German means B flat Hauptstimme (Ger): main voice, chief part; i.e., the contrapuntal line of primary importance, in opposition to Nebenstimme hemiola (English, from Greek): the imposition of a pattern of rhythm or articulation other than that implied by the time signature; specifically, in triple time (for example in 3/4) the imposition of a duple pattern (as if the time signature were, for example, 2/4). See Syncopation. hervortretend (Ger): prominent, pronounced Homophony : A musical texture with one voice (or melody line) accompanied by chords; also used as an adjective (homophonic). Compare with polyphony, in which several voices or melody lines are performed at the same time. [ I ] immer (Ger): always imperioso: imperiously impetuoso: impetuously improvvisando: with improvisation improvvisato: improvised, or as if improvised in altissimo: in the highest; i.e., play or sing an octave higher incalzando: getting faster and louder innig: intimately, heartfelt insistendo: insistently, deliberate in modo di: in the art of, in the style of intimo: intimately intro: opening section irato: angrily -issimo: a suffix meaning &apos;extremely&apos;, e.g. fortissimo or prestissimo -issimamente: a suffix meaning &apos;as...as can be&apos;, e.g. leggerissimamente, meaning &apos;as light as can be&apos; [ J ] Jazz standard (or simply &quot; standard &quot; ): a well-known composition from the jazz repertoire which is widely played and recorded. [ K ] keyboardist (Eng) : a musician who plays any instrument with a keyboard. In Classical music, this may refer to instruments such as the piano, pipe organ, harpsichord, and so on. In a jazz or popular music context, this may refer to instruments such as the piano, electric piano, synthesizer, Hammond organ, and so on. kräftig (Ger): strongly Klangfarbenmelodie (Ger): &quot; tone-color-melody &quot;, distribution of pitch or melody among instruments, varying timbre [ L ] lacrimoso: tearfully; i.e., sadly laissez vibrer, l.v. (Fr): allow the sound to continue, do not damp; used frequently in harp music, occasionally in piano or percussion. For percussion &amp; electric guitar, &quot; let ring &quot; is more common. lamentando: lamenting, mournfully lamentoso: lamenting, mournfully langsam (Ger): slowly largamente: broadly; i.e., slowly (same as largo) larghetto: somewhat slowly; not as slow as largo larghissimo: very slowly; slower than largo largo: broadly; i.e., slowly leap (skip): a melodic interval greater than a major 2nd, as opposed to a step. Melodies which move by a leap are called &quot; disjunct &quot;. Octave leaps are not uncommon in florid vocal music. lebhaft (Ger): briskly, lively legato : joined; i.e., smoothly, in a connected manner (see also articulation ) leggiero, leggiermente or leggiadro: lightly, delicately (The different forms of this word, including leggierezza, &quot; lightness &quot;, are properly spelled in Italian as legger- without the i.) leggierissimo: very lightly and delicately lent (Fr): slowly lentando: gradual slowing and softer lentissimo: very slowly lento: slowly liberamente: freely libero: free, freely lilt: a jaunty rhythm l&apos;istesso: see lo stesso, below loco: [in] place; i.e., perform the notes at the pitch written, generally used to cancel an 8va or 8vb direction. In string music, also used to indicate return to normal playing position (see Playing the violin ). long accent Hit hard and keep full value of note ( &gt; ) lontano: from a distance; distantly lo stesso (or commonly, but ungrammatically, l&apos;istesso): the same; applied to the manner of articulation, tempo, etc. lo stesso tempo (or l&apos;istesso tempo): the same tempo, despite changes of time signature lugubre: lugubrious, mournful luminoso: luminously lunga: long (often applied to a fermata ) lusingando: coaxingly [ M ] [ mezza voce ] [ Moll ] ma: but ma non troppo: but not too much maestoso: majestically, in a stately fashion magico: magically maggiore: the major key magnifico: magnificent main droite (French): [played with the] right hand (abbreviation: MD or m.d.) main gauche (French): [played with the] left hand (abbreviation: MG or m.g.) malinconico: melancholic mancando: dying away mano destra: [played with the] right hand (abbreviation: MD or m.d.) mano sinistra: [played with the] left hand (abbreviation: MS or m.s.) marcatissimo: with much accentuation marcato, marc.: marked; i.e., with accentuation, execute every note as if it were to be accented marcia: a march; alla marcia means in the manner of a march martellato: hammered out marziale: martial, solemn and fierce mässig (German): moderately (also: mäßig) MD: see mano destra and main droite melancolico: melancholic melisma : the technique of changing the note (pitch) of a syllable of text while it is being sung measure (US): also &quot; bar &quot; the period of a musical piece that encompasses a complete cycle of the time signature, e.g., in 4/4 time, a measure has four quarter note beats medesimo tempo: same tempo, despite changes of time signature medley: piece composed from parts of existing pieces, usually three, played one after another, sometimes overlapping. meno: less; see meno mosso, for example, less mosso messa di voce : in singing, a controlled swell, i.e. crescendo then diminuendo, on a long held note, especially in Baroque music and in the bel canto period mesto: mournful, sad meter (or metre): the pattern of a music piece&apos;s rhythm of strong and weak beats mezza voce: half voice; i.e., with subdued or moderated volume mezzo: half; used in combinations like mezzo forte (mf), meaning moderately loud mezzo forte: half loudly; i.e., moderately loudly. See dynamics. mezzo piano: half softly; i.e., moderately softly. See dynamics. mezzo-soprano : a female singer with a range usually extending from the A below middle C to the F an eleventh above middle C. Mezzo-sopranos generally have a darker vocal tone than sopranos, and their vocal range is between that of a soprano and that of an contralto. MG: see main gauche misterioso: mysteriously mobile: flexible, changeable moderato: moderate; often combined with other terms, usually relating to tempo; for example, allegro moderato modere (Fr): moderately modesto: modest modulation is most commonly the act or process of changing from one key (tonic, or tonal center) to another. This may or may not be accompanied by a change in key signature. Moll (German) : minor; used in key signature s as, for example, a-Moll ( A minor ), b-Moll ( B b minor ), or h-Moll ( B minor ) (see also Dur (major) in this list) molto: very morendo: dying; i.e., dying away in dynamics, and perhaps also in tempo mosso: moved, moving; used with a preceding più or meno (see in this list), for faster or slower respectively MS: see mano sinistra moto: motion; usually seen as con moto, meaning with motion or quickly movement : a section of a musical composition (such as a sonata or concerto ) munter (German): lively muta [in...]: Change: either a change of instrument, e.g. flute to piccolo, horn in F to horn in Bb; or a change of tuning, e.g. guitar muta 6 in D. Note: does not mean &quot; mute &quot;, for which con sordina or con sordino is used. Muta comes from the Italian verb mutare (to change into something). [ N ] [ natural ] narrante: narratingly natural: a symbol ( ) that cancels the effect of a sharp or a flat (see in this list) naturale or nat.: natural; i.e., discontinue a special effect, such as col legno, sul tasto, sul ponticello, or playing in harmonics N.C.: no chord, written in the chord row of music notation to show there is no chord being played, and no implied harmony Nebenstimme (Ger): secondary part; i.e., a secondary contrapuntal part, always occurring simultaneously with, and subsidiary to, the Hauptstimme nicht (Ger): not niente: &quot; nothing &quot;, barely audible, dying away nobile or nobilmente: in a noble fashion nocturne (Fr): a piece written for the night notes inégales (Fr): unequal notes; a principally Baroque performance practice of applying long-short rhythms to pairs of notes written as equal; see also swung note notturno: same as nocturne (see above) number opera : an opera consisting of &quot; numbers, &quot; e.g. aria s, intermixed with recitative [ O ] obbligato: required, indispensable octave : interval between one musical pitch and another with half or double its frequency. 12 semitone s equals an octave, so does the first and eighth (hence &quot; oct &quot; ave) note in a major or minor scale. omaggio: homage, celebration one-voice-per-part, or OVPP : the practice of using solo voices on each musical line or part in choral music. organ trio : in jazz or rock, a group of three musicians which includes a Hammond organ player and two other instruments, often an electric guitar player and a drummer. ossia or oppure: or instead; i.e., according to some specified alternative way of performing a passage, which is marked with a footnote, additional small notes, or an additional staff ostinato : obstinate, persistent; i.e., a short musical pattern that is repeated throughout an entire composition or portion of a composition ottava: octave; e.g. ottava bassa: an octave lower [ P ] [ pianissimo ] parlando or parlante: like speech, enunciated Partitur (Ger): full orchestral score passionato: passionately pastorale: in a pastoral style, peaceful and simple pausa: rest pedale or ped: In piano scores, this instructs the player to press the damper pedal to sustain the note or chord being played. The player may be instructed to release the pedal with an asterisk marking (*). In organ scores, it tells the organist that a section is to be performed on the bass pedalboard with the feet. penseroso: thoughtfully, meditatively perdendosi: dying away; decrease in dynamics, perhaps also in tempo pesante: heavy, ponderous peu à peu (Fr): little by little pezzo: a composition pianissimo or pp : very gently; i.e., perform very softly, even softer than piano. This convention can be extended; the more ps that are written, the softer the composer wants the musician to play or sing, thus ppp (pianississimo) would be softer than pp. Dynamics in a piece should be interpreted relative to the other dynamics in the same piece. For example, pp should be executed as softly as possible, but if ppp is found later in the piece, pp should be markedly louder than ppp. More than three ps (ppp) or three fs (fff) are uncommon. piano or p (usually): gently; i.e., played or sung softly (see dynamics ) piano-vocal score : the same as a vocal score, a piano arrangement along with the vocal parts of an opera, cantata, or similar piacevole: pleasant, agreeable piangevole: plaintive pietoso: pitiful, piteous più: more; see mosso for an example piuttosto: rather, somewhat; e.g. allegro piuttosto presto pizzicato : pinched, plucked; i.e., in music for bowed strings, plucked with the fingers as opposed to played with the bow; compare arco (in this list), which is inserted to cancel a pizzicato instruction pochettino or poch.: very little poco: a little, as in poco più allegro (a little faster) poco a poco: little by little poetico: poetic discourse poi: then, indicating a subsequent instruction in a sequence; diminuendo poi subito fortissimo, for example: getting softer then suddenly very loud pomposo: pompous, ceremonious portamento: carrying; i.e., 1. generally, sliding in pitch from one note to another, usually pausing just above or below the final pitch, then sliding quickly to that pitch. If no pause is executed, then it is a basic glissando; or 2. in piano music, an articulation between legato and staccato, like portato, in this list portato or loure: carried; i.e., non-legato, but not as detached as staccato (same as portamento [2], in this list) posato: settled potpourri or pot-pourri (Fr): potpourri (as used in other senses in English); i.e., a kind of musical form structured as ABCDEF... etc.; the same as medley or, sometimes, fantasia precipitato: precipitately prelude or prélude (Fr): a musical introduction to subsequent movements during the Baroque era (1600&apos;s/17th century). It can also be a movement in its own right, which was more common in the Romantic era (mid 1700s/18th century) prestissimo: extremely quickly, as fast as possible presto: very quickly prima volta: the first time; for example prima volta senza accompagnamento (the first time without accompaniment) primo or prima (the feminine form): first [ Q ] quarter tone: Half of a semitone; a pitch division not used in most Western music notation, except in some contemporary art music or experimental music. Quarter tones are used in Western popular music forms such as jazz and blues and in a variety of non-Western musical cultures. quasi (Latin and Italian): as if, almost, e.g. quasi recitativo like a recitative in an opera, or quasi una fantasia like a fantasia [ R ] [ rubato ] [ run ] rallentando or rall.: Broadening of the tempo (often not discernible from ritardando); progressively slower rapido: fast rapide (Fr): fast rasch (Ger): fast ravvivando: quicken pace recitativo: recitatively; one voice without accompaniment religioso: religiously repente: suddenly restez (Fr): stay; i.e., remain on a note or string retenu (Fr): hold back; same as the Italian ritenuto (see below) ridicolosamente: humorously, inaccurate, and loosely rinforzando (rf, or rinf.): reinforced; i.e., emphasized; sometimes like a sudden crescendo, but often applied to a single note risoluto: resolutely rit.: an abbreviation for ritardando; &apos;&apos;musicdictionary&apos;&apos;;. &apos;&apos;Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary&apos;&apos;; American Heritage Dictionary, 4th edition; Gardner Read, Music Notation, 2nd edition, p.  282. also an abbreviation for ritenuto &apos;&apos;Dolmetsch Online&apos;&apos;, &quot; Tempo &quot;; Oxford American Dictionary; Collins English Dictionary. ritardando, ritard., rit.: slowing down; decelerating; opposite of accelerando ritenuto, riten., rit.: suddenly slower, held back (usually more so but more temporarily than a ritardando, and it may, unlike ritardando, apply to a single note) ritmico: rhythmical ritmo: rhythm, e.g. ritmo di # battute meaning a rhythm of # measures ritornello : a recurring passage for orchestra in the first or final movement of a solo concerto or aria (also in works for chorus). rolled chord : see arpeggiato in this list roulade (Fr): a rolling; i.e., a florid vocal phrase rondo : a musical form in which a certain section returns repeatedly, interspersed with other sections: ABACA is a typical structure or ABACABA rubato : robbed; i.e., flexible in tempo, applied to notes within a musical phrase for expressive effect ruhig (Ger): peaceful run : a rapid series of ascending or descending musical notes which are closely spaced in pitch forming a scale ruvido: roughly [ S ] [ segno ] [ senza sordina ] [ sforzando ] [ # ] [ sul ponticello ] saltando: bouncing the bow as in a staccato arpeggio, literally means &quot; jumping &quot; sanft (Ger): gently scatenato: unchained, wildly Carl Orff, Carmina Burana scherzando, scherzoso: playfully scherzo : a light, &quot; joking &quot; or playful musical form, originally and usually in fast triple metre, often replacing the minuet in the later Classical period and the Romantic period, in symphonies, sonatas, string quartets and the like; in the 19th century some scherzi were independent movements for piano, etc. schleppen (Ger): to drag; usually nicht schleppen ( &quot; don&apos;t drag &quot; ), paired with nicht eilen ( &quot; don&apos;t hurry &quot; ) in Gustav Mahler &apos;s scores schnell (Ger): fast schneller (Ger): faster schwungvoll (Ger): lively, swinging, bold, spirited schwer (Ger): heavy scordatura : out of tune; i.e., an alternative tuning used for the strings of a string instrument scorrendo, scorrevole: gliding from note to note secco, or sec (Fr): dry segno : sign, usually Dal Segno (see above) &quot; from the sign &quot;, indicating a return to the point marked by Segno segue : carry on to the next section without a pause sehr (Ger): very semitone: the smallest pitch difference between notes (in most Western music) (e.g., F–F#) semplice: simply sempre: always senza: without senza misura : without measure senza sordina, or senza sordine (plural) : without the mute; compare con sordina in this list; see also Sordino. Note: sordina, with plural sordine, is strictly correct Italian, but the forms con sordino and con sordini are much more commonly used as terms in music. In piano music (notably in Beethoven&apos;s Moonlight Sonata ), senza sordini or senza sordina (or some variant) is sometimes used to mean keep the sustain pedal depressed, since the sustain pedal lifts the dampers off the strings, with the effect that all notes are sustained indefinitely. serioso: seriously sforzando or sfz : made loud; i.e., a sudden strong accent shake: a jazz term describing a trill between one note and its minor third; or, with brass instruments, between a note and its next overblown harmonic. sharp: a symbol ( ) that raises the pitch of the note by a semitone. The term may also be used as an adjective to describe a situation where a singer or musician is performing a note in which the intonation is an eighth or a quarter of a semitone too high in pitch. short accent: Hit the note hard and short. (^) si (Fr): seventh note of the series ut, re, mi, fa, sol, la, si, in fixed-doh solmization. siciliana : a Sicilian dance in 12/8 or 6/8 meter Definition of Siciliano at Dictionary.com sign: see segno silenzio: silence; i.e., without reverberations simile: similarly; i.e., continue applying the preceding directive, whatever it was, to the following passage sipario: curtain (stage) slargando or slentando: becoming broader or slower (that is, becoming more largo or more lento) smorzando or smorz.: extinguishing or dampening; usually interpreted as a drop in dynamics, and very often in tempo as well soave: smoothly, gently sopra: above sognando: dreamily solo break: a jazz term that instructs a lead player or rhythm section member to play an improvised solo cadenza for one or two measures (sometimes abbreviated as &quot; break &quot; ), without any accompaniment. The solo part is often played in a rhythmically free manner, until the player performs a pickup or lead-in line, at which time the band recommences playing in the original tempo. solenne: solemn solo, plural soli: alone; i.e., executed by a single instrument or voice. The instruction soli requires more than one player or singer; in a jazz big band this refers to an entire section playing in harmony. sonata : a piece played as opposed to sung. sonatina: a little sonata sonatine: a little sonata, used in some countries instead of sonatina sonore: sonorous sonoro: ringing soprano : the highest of the standard four voice ranges (bass, tenor, alto, soprano) sordina, sordine (plural): a mute, or a damper in the case of the piano. Note: sordina, with plural sordine, is strictly correct Italian, but the forms sordino and sordini are much more commonly used as terms in music. See also con sordina, senza sordina, in this list. sordino: see sordina, above sortita: a principal singer&apos;s first entrance in an opera sospirando: sighing sostenuto: sustained, lengthened sotto voce : in an undertone i.e. quietly spianato: smooth, even spiccato : distinct, separated; i.e., a way of playing the violin and other bowed instruments by bouncing the bow on the string, giving a characteristic staccato effect spinto : literally &quot; pushed &quot; spiritoso: spiritedly staccato : making each note brief and detached; the opposite of legato. In musical notation, a small dot under or over the head of the note indicates that it is to be articulated as staccato. stanza: a verse of a song stornello originally truly &apos;improvised&apos; now taken as &apos;appearing to be improvised,&apos; an Italian &apos;folk&apos; song, the style of which used for example by Puccini in certain of his operas. strascinando or strascicante: indicating a passage should be played in a heavily slurred manner strepitoso: noisy, forceful stretto : tight, narrow; i.e., faster or hastening ahead; also, a passage in a fugue in which the contrapuntal texture is denser, with close overlapping entries of the subject in different voices; by extension, similar closely imitative passages in other compositions stringendo: gradually getting faster (literally, tightening, narrowing); i.e., with a pressing forward or acceleration of the tempo (that is, becoming stretto, see preceding entry) subito: suddenly (e.g., subito pp, which instructs the player to suddenly drop to pianissimo as an effect) sul E: &quot; on E &quot;, indicating a passage is to be played on the E string of a violin. Also seen: sul A, sul D, sul G, sul C, indicating a passage to be played on one of the other strings of a string instrument. sul ponticello : on the bridge; i.e., in string playing, an indication to bow (or sometimes to pluck ) very near to the bridge, producing a characteristic glassy sound, which emphasizes the higher harmonic s at the expense of the fundamental; the opposite of sul tasto sul tasto: on the fingerboard; i.e., in string playing, an indication to bow (or sometimes to pluck ) over the fingerboard; the opposite of sul ponticello. Playing over the fingerboard produces a warmer, gentler tone. sur la touche (Fr): sul tasto syncopation : a disturbance or interruption of the regular flow of downbeat rhythm with emphasis on the sub-division or up-beat, e.g. in Ragtime music. [ T ] [ Jazz Piano: The Left Hand Scivales Riccardo 2005 Ekay Music, Inc. 1-929009-54-2 http://books.google.com/books?id%3D9NwZ6wi5Oj0C%26amp%3Bpg%3DPT86%26amp%3Blpg%3DPT86%26amp%3Bdq%3D%22tempo%2Bdi%2Bsturb%22#v%3Donepage%26amp%3Bq%3D%22tempo%20di%20sturb%22%26amp%3Bf%3Dfalse 2011 April 16 ] tacet : silent; do not play tasto solo : &apos;single key&apos;; used on a continuo part to indicate that the notes should be played without harmony tempo : time; i.e., the overall speed of a piece of music tempo di marcia: march tempo tempo di sturb de neighbors seen in Fats Waller &apos;s arrangement of Stardust tempo di valse: waltz tempo tempo giusto: in strict time tempo primo, tempo uno, or tempo I (sometimes also written as tempo I° or tempo 1ero ): resume the original speed tempo rubato, means &quot; robbed time &quot;; an expressive way of performing a rhythm; see rubato &apos;&apos; teneramente: tenderly tenerezza: tenderness tenor : the second lowest of the standard four voice ranges (bass, tenor, alto, soprano) tenuto : held; i.e., touch on a note slightly longer than usual, but without generally altering the note&apos;s value ternary : having three parts. In particular, referring to a three-part musical form with the parts represented by letters: ABA tessitura : the &apos;best&apos; or most comfortable pitch range, generally used to identify the most prominent / common vocal range within a piece of music Tierce de Picardie: see Picardy third timbre : the quality of a musical tone that distinguishes voices and instruments time: in a jazz or rock score, after a rubato or rallentendo section, the term &quot; time &quot; indicates that performers should return to tempo (this is equivalent to the term &quot; a tempo &quot; ) tosto: rapidly tranquillo: calmly, peacefully tremolo : shaking; i.e., a rapid repetition of the same note, or an alternation between two or more notes (often an octave on the piano). String players perform tremolo with the bow by rapidly moving the bow while the arm is tense. It can also be intended (inaccurately) to refer to vibrato, which is a slight undulation in pitch. It is notated by a strong diagonal bar across the note stem, or a detached bar for a set of notes (or stemless notes). tre corde or tc (or sometimes inaccurately tre corda): three strings; i.e., release the soft pedal of the piano (see una corda) triplet (shown with a horizontal bracket and a &apos;3&apos;): Three notes in the place of two, used to subdivide a beat. tronco, tronca: broken off, truncated troppo: too much; usually seen as non troppo, meaning moderately or, when combined with other terms, not too much, such as allegro [ma] non troppo (fast but not too fast) tutti : all; all together, usually used in an orchestral or choral score when the orchestra or all of the voices come in at the same time, also seen in Baroque-era music where two instruments share the same copy of music, after one instrument has broken off to play a more advanced form: they both play together again at the point marked tutti. See also: ripieno. [ U ] [ unison ] un, uno, or una: one, as for example in the following entries una corda : one string; i.e., in piano music, depress the soft pedal, altering, and reducing the volume of, the sound. In some pianos, this literally results in the hammer striking one string rather than two or three. (For most notes on modern instruments, in fact it results in striking two rather than three strings.) Its counterpart, tre corde (three strings; see in this list), is the opposite: the soft pedal is to be released. un poco: a little unison o or unis (Fr): in unison; i.e., several players in a group are to play exactly the same notes within their written part, as opposed to splitting simultaneous notes among themselves. Often used to mark the return from divisi ( see in this list ). uptempo: a fast, lively, or increased tempo or played or done in such a tempo. &quot; uptempo &quot; at Oxford Dictionaries Online It is also used as an umbrella term for a quick-paced electronic music style. ut (Fr): first note of the series ut, re, mi, fa, sol, la, si, in fixed-doh solmization. [ V ] vagans: the fifth part in a motet, named so most probably because it had no specific range vamp till cue: a jazz, fusion, and musical theatre term which instructs rhythm section members to repeat and vary a short ostinato passage, riff, or &quot; groove &quot; until the band leader or conductor instructs them to move onto the next section veloce: with velocity velocissimo: as quickly as possible; usually applied to a cadenza -like passage or run vibrato : vibrating; i.e., a more or less rapidly repeated slight alteration in the pitch of a note, used to give a richer sound and as a means of expression. Often confused with tremolo, which refers either to a similar variation in the volume of a note, or to rapid repetition of a single note. via: away, out, off; as in via sordina or sordina via: &apos;mute off&apos; vif (Fr): quickly, lively vite (Fr): fast vittorioso: victoriously virtuoso: (noun or adjective) performing with exceptional ability, technique, or artistry vivo: lively vivace: very lively, up-tempo vivacissimo: very lively vocal score or piano-vocal score: a music score of an opera, or a vocal or choral composition with orchestra (like oratorio or cantata ) where the vocal parts are written out in full but the accompaniment is reduced to two staves and adapted for playing on piano vivamente: quickly and lively voce: voice volante: flying V.S. (volti subito): turn suddenly; i.e., turn the page quickly. While this indication is sometimes added by printers, it is more commonly indicated by orchestral members in pencil as a reminder to quickly turn to the next page. [ W ] wenig (Ger): a little, not much wolno (Polish): loose, slowly; found as a directive in The Elephant from The Carnival of the Animals by Saint-Saëns [ Z ] Zählzeit (Ger): beat zart (Ger): tender Zartheit (Ger): tenderness zärtlich (Ger): tenderly Zeichen (Ger): sign Zeitmaß, also spelled Zeitmass (Ger): time-measure, i.e., tempo zelo, zeloso, zelosamente: zeal, zealous, zealously ziehen (Ger): to draw out ziemlich (Ger): fairly, quite, pretty, or rather zitternd (Ger): trembling; i.e., tremolando zögernd (Ger): doubtful, delaying; i.e., rallentando zurückhalten (Ger): hold back [ See also ] [ Music ] [ References ] [ 2 ] [ External links ] Interpretations of Jazz Band Literature, musical terms used in jazz Virginia Tech Multimedia Music Dictionary (contains audio samples) Choral Conducting Terms Classical musical terms Musical Terms Dictionary Definitions Musical terminology bar:Glossar vo de Musiausdrick cs:Hudební terminologie cy:Termau cerddorol da:Italienske og franske musikudtryk de:Liste der musikalischen Vortragsbezeichnungen et:Noodikirja märkide loend es:Anexo:Glosario de terminología musical eo:Muzika vortaro id:Daftar istilah musik is:Listi yfir erlend orð í tónfræði it:Glossario musicale he:תאוריית המוזיקה - מונחים ja:欧文西洋音楽用語の一覧 ro:Listă de termeni muzicali ru:Список музыкальных обозначений sk:Hudobná terminológia sl:Glasbeno izrazoslovje fi:Luettelo musiikkitermeistä sv:Lista över musiktermer zh:音乐术语列表