[ October 2008 ] Frederic Anthony Rzewski (born April 13, 1938 in Westfield, Massachusetts ) is an American composer and virtuoso pianist. [ Biography ] Rzewski (pronounced zheff-skee) began playing piano at age 5. He attended Phillips Academy, Harvard and Princeton, where his teachers included Randall Thompson, Roger Sessions, Walter Piston and Milton Babbitt. In 1960, he went to Italy, a trip which was formative in his future musical development. In addition to studying with Luigi Dallapiccola, he began a career as a performer of new piano music, often with an improvisatory element. A few years later he was a co-founder of Musica Elettronica Viva with Alvin Curran and Richard Teitelbaum. Musica Elettronica Viva conceived music as a collective, collaborative process, with improvisation and live electronic instrument s prominently featured. In 1971 he returned to New York. { &quot; Frederic Rzewski, &quot; in The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians, ed. Stanley Sadie. 20 vol. London, Macmillan Publishers Ltd., 1980. } In 1977 Rzewski became Professor of Composition at the Conservatoire Royal de Musique in Liège, Belgium, then directed by Henri Pousseur. Occasionally he teaches for short periods at schools and universities throughout the U.S. and Europe, including Yale University, the University of Cincinnati, the California Institute of the Arts, the University of California, San Diego, the Royal Conservatory of The Hague and Trinity College of Music, London. (ibid) Many of Rzewski&apos;s works are inspired by secular and socio-historical themes, show a deep political conscience and feature improvisational elements. Some of his better-known works include The People United Will Never Be Defeated! (36 variations on the Sergio Ortega song El pueblo unido jamás será vencido ), a set of virtuosic piano variations written as a companion piece to Beethoven&apos;s Diabelli Variations; Coming Together, which is a setting of letters from Sam Melville, an inmate at Attica State Prison, at the time of the famous riots there (1971); North American Ballads; Night Crossing with Fisherman; Fougues; Fantasia and Sonata; The Price of Oil, and Le Silence des Espaces Infinis, both of which use graphical notation; Les Moutons de Panurge; and the Antigone-Legend, which features a principled opposition to the policies of the State, and which was premiered on the night that the United States bombed Libya in April 1986 (ibid). Between his most recent compositions, the most interesting are the two sets of Nanosonatas (2007) and the Cadenza con o senza Beethoven (2003), written for Beethoven &apos;s Fourth Piano Concerto. Nicolas Slonimsky (1993) says of him in Baker&apos;s Biographical Dictionary of Musicians : &quot; He is furthermore a granitically overpowering piano technician, capable of depositing huge boulders of sonoristic material across the keyboard without actually wrecking the instrument. &quot; [ Discography ] [ March 2009 ] The People United Will Never Be Defeated!, played by Marc-André Hamelin (Hyperion Records) The People United Will Never Be Defeated!, played by Stephen Drury (New Albion Records) Four North American Ballads, played by Paul Jacobs (Nonesuch Records) [ Played By Rzewski ] Capriccio Hassidico (1991) Musica Elettronica Viva - United Patchwork (1977) Musica Elettronica Viva - Leave The City Musica Elettronica Viva - Spacecraft Musica Elettronica Viva - Live 7 &quot; (Recorded live at Philgena Oakland CA 1994) Cornelius Cardew - We Sing For The Future! Tom Johnson - An Hour for Piano (1985) Henri Pousseur - Aquarius-Memorial Henri Pousseur - La Guirlande de Pierre Stockhausen - Klavierstück X (Wergo LP) [ Literature ] Frederic Rzewski Nonsequiturs - Writings &amp; Lectures on Improvisation, Composition, and Interpretation. Unlogische Folgerungen - Schriften und Vorträge zu Improvisation, Komposition und Interpretation. Edition Musiktexte, Cologne, 2007. ISBN 3-9803151-8-5. Петров, Владислав Олегович Фредерик Ржевски: путь обновления традиций. – Астрахань: ГАОУ АО ДПО «АИПКП», 2011. – 100 с. // Petrov, Vladislav O. Frederic Rzewski: upgrade path traditions. - Astrakhan: AIPKP, 2011. - 100 p. [ Sources ] Murray, Edward. “Rzewski, Frederic,” in The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians, ed. Stanley Sadie. 20 vols. London: Macmillan Publishers Ltd., 1980. ISBN 1-56159-174-2. Murray, Edward. “Rzewski, Frederic.” The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians, second edition, edited by Stanley Sadie and John Tyrrell. 29 vols. London: Macmillan Publishers, 2001. ISBN 1-56159-239-0. Slonimsky, Nicolas. The Concise Edition of Baker&apos;s Biographical Dictionary of Musicians, 8th ed. Revised by Nicolas Slonimsky. New York: Schirmer Books, 1993. ISBN 0-02-872416-X. [ References ] [ External links ] [ 2815 ] [ Rzewski Frederic Rzewski ] [ Rzewski, Frederic ] Frog Peak Music (a composers&apos; collective) has scores for some Frederic Rzewski compositions. Frederic Rzewski page on New Albion Records. Moonrise with Memories. Art of the States. Morrison, Noel. “ Steve Lacy, Irene Aebi, and Frederic Rzewski.” Review of Packet (incl. audio), 15 August 2001. Epitonic.com. [ Interviews ] Duffie, Bruce. “ Composer/Pianist Frederic Rzewski: A Conversation with Bruce Duffie.” Interview from 19 January 1995. Golden, Barbara. “Conversation with Frederic Rzewski.” &apos;&apos;eContact! 12.2 — Interviews (2)&apos;&apos; (April 2010). Montréal: CEC. Varela, Daniel. Interview with Frederic Rzewski. Perfect Sound Forever (March 2003). [ Rzewski, Frederic April 13, 1938 ] Category:1938 births Category:20th-century classical composers Category:21st-century classical composers Category:Harvard University alumni Category:Princeton University alumni Category:American composers Category:Contemporary classical music performers Category:Living people Category:American musicians of Polish descent Category:American classical pianists Category:Composers for piano da:Frederic Rzewski de:Frederic Rzewski es:Frederic Rzewski fr:Frederic Rzewski nl:Frederic Rzewski ja:フレデリック・ジェフスキー pt:Frederic Rzewski fi:Frederic Rzewski