Barnabe Googe or Gooche (11 June 1540 - 7 February 1594) (also spelled Barnaby Googe) was a poet and translator, one of the earliest English pastoral poets. [ Early life ] Barnabe Googe was born on 11 June 1540 (St Barnabas Day), in London or Kent, the son of Robert Googe (or Goche), recorder of Lincoln. He studied at the strongly Reformist Christ&apos;s College, Cambridge, [ GC555B Gooche, Barnabas ] and was long thought to have also studied at New College, Oxford, although this appears uncertain. Afterwards, he moved to Staple Inn, where his cousin, William Lovelace, held the position of Reader. Around this time, he started to write poetry, and found himself in an exciting creative coterie with other young writers, such as Jasper Heywood and George Turberville. previous authorities claim that he became a gentleman pensioner to Queen Elizabeth, in effect, a member of her bodyguard, but this has been disproved. Nonetheless, Googe did have close associations with the court, since he was related to William Cecil. Googe exploited this important connection in the years that followed, and Cecil extended patronage towards his young protegé. It may have been due to Cecil&apos;s encouragement that Googe accompanied the Elizabethan humanist scholar Sir Thomas Challoner on a diplomatic embassy to Spain in 1562. In his absence, Googe&apos;s juvenile poems were sent to the printer by a friend, Laurence Blundeston. On his return, Googe learned of Blundeston&apos;s actions and reluctantly gave his consent to their publication when he discovered that the printer had already paid for the paper for the print run and the composition was underway. The book appeared in 1563 as Eglogs, Epytaphes, and Sonettes. Before the appearance of his book, no writer in England had ever published his own poetry under his own name; in this, Googe was an accidental pioneer. [ Marriage and later life ] Correspondence survives on the subject of Googe&apos;s marriage with Mary Darrell, whose father, Thomas Darrell, refused Googe&apos;s suit on the ground that she was bound by a previous contract. More to the point, recent research has shown that Thomas Darrell was a recusant who harboured Jesuit priests in his manor house of Scotney, near Lamberhurst in Kent. When Googe found his suit discouraged by Thomas Darrell, he appealed to his powerful contacts and the marriage duly took place in 1564 or 1565; Googe took his wife to live in Lamberhurst at the manor house of Chingley. In 1569 he dedicated a long allegorical poem with a moralistic marine topic, The Shippe of Safegarde, to his sisters-in-law. By this time, Googe had served Cecil on a military expedition to Ireland, where he had contracted dysentry and nearly died. In 1571 he was returned as MP for Aldborough, north Yorkshire [ http://www.historyofparliamentonline.org/volume/1558-1603/member/googe-barnaby-1540-94 History of Parliament 2011-09-27 ]. Further service in Ireland awaited him in 1582 when Googe was appointed to the position of provost-marshal of the court of Connaught, and some twenty letters of his in this capacity are preserved in the Public Records Office. It is often said, on scant evidence, that Googe knew other poets in Irish service, notably Edmund Spenser. Googe repeatedly petitioned the political masters in London to be allowed to come home. He finally succeeded in selling his office in the late 1580s, and he retired to his family lands in Alvingham in Lincolnshire. He died there on 7 February 1594 and was buried at North Cockerington. [ Poetry ] Googe&apos;s poems are written in the Plain or Native Style, which preceded and subsequently competed with the Petrarchan style. Petrarchan love poetry (much of the work of Henry Howard, Earl of Surrey, Sir Philip Sydney, Thomas Campion...) was decorative, metaphorical and often exaggerated; it also involved a more fluid mastery of iambic English poetry than the alliterative Native Style: Googe&apos;s tonic accents are heavy, the unaccents light; the result is sometimes deliberately blunt and plodding. The poems of George Turberville, Thomas More, George Gascoyne and Walter Ralegh are examples of a similar style. Plain Style dealt with serious subjects in a serious way: its goal was not ornamental beauty, but truth. Googe&apos;s poem Of Money ( &quot; Give money me, take friendship whoso list / For friends are gone come once adversity... &quot; ) is a well-known example of the tradition. Googe was an ardent Protestant, and his poetry is coloured by his religious and political views. In the third &quot; Eglog, &quot; for instance, he laments the decay of the old nobility and the rise of a new aristocracy of wealth, and he gives an indignant account of the sufferings of his co-religionists under Mary of England. The other eclogues deal with the sorrows of earthly love, leading up to a dialogue between Corydon and Cornix, in which the heavenly love is extolled. The volume includes epitaphs on Nicholas Grimald, John Bale and on Thomas Phaer, whose translation of Virgil Googe esteemed. The English pastoral poem &quot; Phyllida was a fayer maid &quot; (from Tottel&apos;s Miscellany of 1558) has been doubtfully ascribed to Googe, despite showing little stylistic rapport with his acknowldged works. But Googe&apos;s important contribution to pastoral poetry in English rests with his cycle of eclogues that synthesise trends from classical pastoral, the work of Mantuan, and the pastoral elements of Spanish romance, and he was the first English writer to reflect the influence of the Diana Enamorada of Montemayor. His other works include: a translation from Marcellus Palingenius (said to be an anagram for Pier Angelo Manzolli) of a satirical Latin poem, Zodiacus vitae (Venice, 1531?), in twelve books, under the title of The Zodyake of Life (1560); The Popish Kingdome, or reign of Antichrist (1570), translated from Thomas Kirchmeyer or Naogeorgus; The Spiritual Husbandrie from the same author, printed with the last Foure Bookes of Husbandrie (1577), collected by Conradus Heresbachius; The Overthrow of the Gout (1577), a translation from Christopher Ballista ( Christophe Arbaleste ), and The Proverbes of Lopes de Mendoza (1579). The Zodyake of Life was a significant translation, being adopted as a textbook for English grammar schools. As such, its ideas colour many of the works of English writers of the latter part of the sixteenth and the first part of the seventeenth centuries. Part of the book&apos;s appeal, in addition to its poetical astronomy, was its notoriety as a Reformist text: Palingenius was placed on the Index of Prohibited Books by the Inquisition and consequently enjoyed popularity in Protestant regions across Europe. [ See also ] Canons of Renaissance poetry [ References ] Raphael Lyne, ‘Googe, Barnabe (1540–1594)’, Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, Oxford University Press, 2004, accessed 8 Sept 2008 This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Chisholm, Hugh, ed (1911). Encyclopædia Britannica (Eleventh ed.). Cambridge University Press. [ External links ] [ lccn-n50-34397 ] [ Googe, Barnabe 11 June 1540 7 February 1594 ] Category:1540 births Category:1594 deaths Category:People from Kent Category:English poets Category:English translators Category:Alumni of Christ&apos;s College, Cambridge Category:Latin–English translators Category:16th-century poets Category:16th-century translators Category:16th-century English people Category:People of the Tudor period Category:Members of the Parliament of England (pre-1707) it:Barnabe Googe la:Barnabas Googe