[ Common Whitethroat Flickr - Rainbirder - Common Whitethroat (Sylvia communis).jpg LC iucn3.1 Animal ia Chordata Aves Passeriformes Sylviidae Sylvia S. communis Sylvia communis Latham, 1787, England ] The Common Whitethroat, Sylvia communis, is a common and widespread typical warbler which breeds throughout Europe and across much of temperate western Asia. This small passerine bird is strongly migratory, and winters in tropical Africa, Arabia and Pakistan. This is one of several Sylvia species that has distinct male and female plumage s. Both sexes are mainly brown above and buff below, with chestnut fringes to the secondary remiges. The adult male has a grey head and a white throat. The female lacks the grey head, and the throat is duller. The Whitethroat&apos;s song is fast and scratchy, with a scolding tone. This species was believed by some [ April 2007 ] to be closely related to the Lesser Whitethroat, the species having evolved only during the end of the last ice age similar to the Willow Warbler and Chiffchaff s. But researchers learned soon that this is not correct, and now it is known that whitethroats are unreliable morphological markers for relationships in Sylvia. Chestnut wing patches, like whitethroats, seem to be plesiomorph ic, but indicate phylogeny better. Nonetheless, apart from the Whitethroat not being closely related to the Lesser Whitethroat group, little can be resolved as it seems a fairly basal taxon.(Helbig 2001, Jønsson &amp; Fjeldså 2006) Female with chicks This is a bird of open country and cultivation, with bushes for nesting. The nest is built in low shrub or bramble s, and 3-7 eggs are laid. Like most &quot; warbler s &quot;, it is insectivorous, but will also take berries and other soft fruit. [ References ] [ Sylvia communis ] [ BirdLife International 2004 52826 Sylvia communis 12 May 2006 ] [ April 2007 ] [ 10.1111/j.1463-6409.2006.00221.x ] Database entry includes justification for why this species is of least concern. Helbig, A. J. (2001): Phylogeny and biogeography of the genus Sylvia. In: Shirihai, Hadoram: Sylvia warblers: 24-25. Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J. ISBN 0-691-08833-0 Jønsson, Knud A. &amp; Fjeldså, Jon (2006): A phylogenetic supertree of oscine passerine birds (Aves: Passeri). Zool. Scripta 35(2): 149–186. (HTML abstract) [ External links ] Ageing and sexing (PDF) by Javier Blasco-Zumeta Avibase Images at www.naturlichter.com [ Whitethroat ] Category:Sylvia Category:Birds of Asia Category:Birds of Pakistan Category:Birds of Europe Category:Birds of Turkey Category:Birds of Western Sahara kbd:Вэдыщхъуэ ba:Һоро килейек bg:Голямо белогушо коприварче br:Devedig-spern ca:Tallareta vulgar cv:Сăрă чечен кайăк cs:Pěnice hnědokřídlá cy:Llwydfron da:Tornsanger de:Dorngrasmücke et:Pruunselg-põõsalind es:Sylvia communis eo:Blankgorĝa silvio eu:Sasi-txinbo fo:Tyrniljómari fr:Fauvette grisette fy:Hagekrûper ga:Gilphíb gl:Papuxa común it:Sylvia communis he:סבכי קוצים kk:Сұр сандуғаш lt:Rudoji devynbalsė hu:Mezei poszáta nl:Grasmus frr:Suurnpiiper no:Tornsanger nn:Tornsongar pms:Sylvia communis pl:Cierniówka rue:Волосинка ru:Серая славка fi:Pensaskerttu sv:Törnsångare tr:Akgerdanlı ötleğen zh:灰白喉林莺