[ May 2012 ] [ August 2010 ] [ 香港經濟日報 Hong Kong Economic Times Financial Daily Mondays to Saturdays Broadsheet Hong Kong Economic Times Holdings Limited Hong Kong Economic Times Limited 26 Jan 1988 Financial &amp; Professional Chinese（Traditional） HK$6 6/F, Kodak House II, 321 Java Road, North Point Hong Kong ] Hong Kong Economic Times (26 January 1988), the leading financial daily in Hong Kong, was founded by Mr. Fung Siu Por, Lawrence (Chairman), Mr. Perry Mak (Managing Director), Mr. Arthur Shek (Executive Director) and other founders with HK$20 million of foundation fund in 1988. Hong Kong Economic Times Holdings Limited was listed on the Main Board of the Stock Exchange of Hong Kong Limited on 3 August 2005 ( [ 00423 ] ). HKET, the leading financial daily in Hong Kong, adheres to the editorial principle of reporting and writing in a professional writing style, mainly focusing on finance, main news, social and mainland China news, commerce &amp; trade, property, executive &amp; market, together with entertainment, columns and leisure. In order to have first-hand news reports on China’s political and economic issues, a reporter station is set up in Beijing. HKET&apos;s major readers are businessmen, executives, investors and professionals, middle class etc. with mission to provide updated, accurate information and impartial reporting. HKET is one of local newspapers mostly subscribed by secondary schools’ students. [ Editorial reporting and writing ] Hong Kong Economic Times (HKET), together with another financial newspaper, Hong Kong Economic Journal, are respected as “professional and serious newspapers” in Hong Kong. Both of them specialize in columns writing, political and economic analysis. However, HKET has not only diversified content into health, human resources, pop culture etc. in recent years, but also enhanced the use of color and image layout. Established with over two decades of history, HKET has well developed into a leading financial daily.Since 1997, HKET has won numerous awards in Hong Kong News Awards of the Newspaper Society of Hong Kong, in particular, embracing the Winner, the 1st Runner-up and the 2nd Runner-up in “Best Business News Reporting &quot; in the years of 1997, 1998, 2000 and 2003. Unlike lots of financial media, HKET doesn&apos;t strongly believe in the free market and the invisible hand. They had repeatedly asked the Hong Kong Government to intervene in the stock market during the 911 incident and 97 financial turmoil, while raising doubts and questions for the discussion of sales tax issue planned by the government. The tax plan was eventually withdrawn in the controversy. In dealing with China-related political issues, HKET maintained relatively moderate stance while reporting the yearly commemoration of protests. [ Magazine tied in with HKET ] Money Times (Mondays) – Specialized in providing information about stock market trends, wealth management, foreign exchange and funds. Financial experts giving tips for investment every week. Money Daily (Tuesdays – Saturdays) First-hand stock market hot talk, China stock analyses and all that stock market new-comers must know. Career Times (Fridays) – An English language recruitment print with numerous job vacancies (Also for retail sale). Property Times (Saturdays) – A property magazine with features and practical tips for transaction, interior design; also cover properties in the mainland. (Also for retail sale) [ hket.com ] Other than the print version of HKET, hket.com also provides the digital edition of HKET with daily printed news and the past three years of news archive. [ HKET &lt; link type= &quot; external &quot; href= &quot; http://www.et-learning.com &quot; &gt; ET-Learning &lt; /link &gt; Online English Learning System ] ET-Learning was launched in 2009 with a newly developed Online English Learning System focusing on New Senior Secondary (NSS) curriculum structure. With over 90 text types, 5,000 vocabulary items etc for polishing listening, reading and writing skills, students can learn and progress at their own pace, while enhancing their English proficiency step by step. ET-Learning System is mainly targeting secondary 4 &amp; 5 students, while junior secondary vocabulary on tourism is designed for junior students. [ Other HKET School Publications subscription ] Econ School《校園經濟》(Mondays &amp; Thursdays) Liberal Studies《通識教育》(Mondays &amp; Thursdays) English Street《英語街》(Mondays &amp; Thursdays) School Chinese《校園中文》(Thursdays) 《發現號》(Wednesdays) Together with daily online version of HKET [ Printed media segment of Hong Kong Economic Times Holdings Limited ] Apart from HKET, other publications under the printed media segment of the group include: Sky Post, a free newspaper (Mondays to Fridays) Launched on 27 July 2011 with &quot; Happy Everyday &quot; as its slogan, Sky Post aims at impressing readers by information with elements of &quot; Funny &quot;, &quot; Inspiring &quot;, &quot; Surprise &quot; and &quot; Trendy &quot;. With young working mass as a major target, it focuses on local and entertainment news. It is distributed for free from Monday to Friday with distribution points covering all districts and major transportation hubs in Hong Kong. e-zone, a mass market IT magazine (Thursdays) (For retail sale) A mass market IT weekly magazine that focuses on the latest trend in information and communications technology. It features application of PC hardware and software, tablet and smartphones how-to, digital AV products highlights and analysis on corporate IT strategies.e-zone was spun off from HKET for total retail sale in late 2003. It ranked Number One among similar magazines in terms of readership (according to Synovate Media Atlas 2009) and gross display advertisement revenue (according to Nielsen Media Research AdEx data based on undiscounted advertising rate cards). U Magazine, a travel and lifestyle magazine (Fridays) (For retail sale) U Magazine, a travel and lifestyle magazine, was launched in Dec 2005. It is a 3-book stylish package, namely Travel, Food and Life+Weekend, focusing on travel and quality living. It covers the latest global travel information and in-depth stories, comprehensive dining guide, distinguished city features, upcoming events of the town, entertainment news and interviews of the week and so on.Besides, its on-line interactive platform, umagazine.com.hk, enables closer relationship &amp; interaction with readers. iMoney, a financial retail weekly (Saturdays) (For retail sale) iMoney was a financial weekly launched on 27 Oct 2007. Its contents focus on wealth management, together with innovative business, marketing gimmicks, workplaces, self-enhancement and etc., covering HK and the Mainland China markets. It targets at the brand new generation who is pursuing for authenticity, erudition and also affluence. It is published every Saturday. [ Book publishing ] ET Press is dedicated to providing its readers with practical and quality contents about investment, business and management. In addition, riding on the success of ET Press, WHY Publishing aims at targeting young readers who look for dynamic and lifestyle books. [ Other Business Segments of HKET Holdings ] Apart from Printed Media business segment, HKET Holdings has diversified its business into Financial News Agency, Information and Solutions; Recruitment Advertising and Training; and Lifestyle Portals: [ Financial news agency, information and solutions ] ET Net : is Hong Kong Number One financial news agency. ET Net has obtained approval certificate to disseminate electronic financial news and information in Mainland China with reporters stationed in Beijing and Shanghai. Besides, ET Net has developed strategic partnership with financial information vendors in the Mainland, to further develop its quotation business in the market. Currently, it has offices or agents in Beijing, Shanghai, Shenzhen and Guangzhou. Its financial news website business ( and ) targets Hong Kong and Mainland China viewers respectively and also offers online advertising service. ET Wealth : Specializes in providing wealth management solutions and application with full-scale funds database, fund performance analysis tools and real time news and commentaries. ET Wealth has developed a total content-rich wealth management system for the banking, finance and insurance industry. ET Trade : Provides the financial market with a truly “One-stop-shop” solution that integrates front office trading system, back office settlement system and Internet trading system for banks and brokerage firms. EPRC : Electronic property information has been offered since 1991. EPRC currently provides comprehensive, user-friendly professional property information, direct marketing and solution businesses for professionals. [ Recruitment advertising and training ] Career Times : Career Times recruitment weekly and its online version careertimes.com.hk has been launched to provide jobseekers and human resources professionals a comprehensive and interactive platform for job searching and recruitment purpose, targeting businessmen and executive. Career Times is the Market Number Two in recruitment classified advertising. ET Business College : ET Business College specializes in different formats of training for business executives and professionals. Services offered include conferences and seminars, academic and professional courses, corporate training and consulting as well as Hong Kong Mainland China exchange programmes. Among which, educational programmes focusing on finance, investment, China business and management are the main specialties. Apart from co-operating with local universities, ET Business College also offers its own branded courses. Customers include large corporations and government departments, accumulating over 200,000 participants. [ Lifestyle portals ] Health Smart : Being inaugurated on 28 February 2008, Health Smart aims to ride on an e-commerce platform to provide comprehensive health care services, from health supplements, personal health care products, organic snacks to professional health knowledge, to its membership base with over 120,000 HealthSmarters. The website, Health Smart facilitates the HealthSmarters with the latest health-related news update, convenient online shopping services and special online offers, at anytime in anywhere. Its core value &quot; Spend Smart with Health Smart &quot; is widely shared. U Travel (formerly known as TravelUSB): a travel website was launched in October 2008 and joined the U brand pavilion in May 2010. Featuring more than 7,500 travel spots, 1,000 travelogues and 60 travel blogs, UTravel.com.hk is the largest portal in the market and the first in Hong Kong to devote 100% of its contents to travel information. U Food : Launched in November 2008, UFood.com.hk is a Web 2.0 dining info-site featuring a comprehensive restaurant directory, as well as various dining privileges, news and reviews from restaurant owners and web-users, complete with interactive features such as charts, forum, and voting zones. U Beauty : A one-stop beauty website. Established in April 2010, it offers discerning trendsetters an array of beauty and cosmetic, as well as skincare and fashion related information. Featuring the latest beauty trends and expert advice, UBeauty.com.hk helps users learn the techniques of A-list makeup artists and brush up their everyday grooming skills. [ Board of directors ] Executive Directors: Mr. Fung Siu Por, Lawrence, Mr. Perry Mak, Mr. Eric Chan, Mr. Arthur Shek, Ms Salome See, Mr. Wally Chan; Non-executive Director: Mr. Stanley Chu; Independent Non-executive Directors: Mr. Paul Chan, Mr. Andrew Chow, Mr. F.C. Lo [ See also ] Official website Newspapers of Hong Kong Media in Hong Kong [ References ] [ 30em ] { (with some dates are skipped such as Public Holidays or days before and after public holiday) } [ Useful links ] Hong Kong Economic Times Holdings Limited website HKET website Sky Post website e-zone magazine website U Magazine magazine website iMoney magazine website ET Press website ET-Learning website ET Net website ET Wealth website ET Trade website EPRC website Career Times website ET Business College website Health Smart website UTravel.com.hk website UFood.com.hk website UBeauty.com.hk website Milestones of &apos;&apos;&apos;Hong Kong Economic Times Holdings Limited&apos;&apos;&apos; Category:Newspapers published in Hong Kong Category:Chinese-language newspapers (Traditional Chinese) Category:Publications established in 1988 zh-yue:香港經濟日報 zh:香港經濟日報