[ Gibraltar Flag of Gibraltar Flag of Gibraltar.svg 110000 1:2 November 8, 1982 White with a red stripe at the bottom with a three-towered, two-tiered red castle in the white section. Each tower has a door and a window and from the door of the middle tower hangs a gold key which mainly overlaps the red stripe. Government Ensign of Gibraltar (1982).svg State ensign of Gibraltar 000010 1998 (1875) 1:2 Blue Ensign with the Union Flag in the canton and the badge of Gibraltar in the fly. Civil Ensign of Gibraltar.svg Civil ensign of Gibraltar 000100 1998 1:2 Red Ensign with the Union Flag in the canton and the badge of Gibraltar in the fly. Flag of the Governor of Gibraltar.svg Flag of the Governor of Gibraltar 000000 1:2 A Union Flag defaced with the coat of arms. ] [ List of flags of Gibraltar ] The flag of Gibraltar is an elongated banner of the coat of arms of Gibraltar, granted by Royal Warrant Queen Isabella I of Castile on 10 July 1502. { http://www.altiusdirectory.com/Travel/gibraltar-flag.php } [ Description ] { Rock of Gibraltar } &quot; An escutcheon on which the upper two thirds shall be a white field and on the said field set a red castle, and below the said castle, on the other third of the escutcheon, which must be a red field in which there must be a white line between the castle and the said red field, there shall be a golden key which hangs by a chain from the said castle, as are here figured &quot;. { Gibraltar Government - National symbols } The flag was regularised in 1982 and is formed by two horizontal bands of white (top, double width) and red with a three-towered red castle in the centre of the white band; { http://www.senojflags.com/Gibraltar-Flags } hanging from the castle gate is a gold key centred in the red band. The flag differs from that of other British overseas territories, in that it is not a British ensign. The castle does not resemble any in Gibraltar, but is supposed to represent the fortress of Gibraltar. The key is said to symbolise the fortress&apos; significance. [ Use ] The flag is flown throughout Gibraltar, sometimes officially alongside the Union Flag and flag of Europe. Prominent places which fly the flag include the frontier with Spain, at the top of The Rock and on the Parliament Building. { britishflags.net- Gibraltar } The flag is a symbol of Gibraltarian nationalism, and is very popular among Gibraltarians. For the Gibraltar National Day (10 September), many Gibraltar homes and offices hang the flag from their windows and balconies, and some individuals even wear and dress their vehicles with the flag for national day celebrations. This was also seen during the 2004 celebrations of the tercentenary of British Gibraltar. Gibraltarian students attending university abroad have been known to take Gibraltarian flags with them, putting them up in university accommodation rooms and hanging them from windows. A Lego flag of Gibraltar 4 metres high and 8 metres long can be seen at the John Mackintosh Hall, which is a cultural centre housing the public library as well as exhibition rooms and a theatre. At the time of its construction, the Lego flag of Gibraltar was the largest flag ever to be made from Lego bricks with a total of 393,857 bricks being used. { http://www.gibraltar.com/gibraltar-sightseeing-and-attractions.html } [ See also ] List of flags of Gibraltar List of British flags List of coats of arms of the United Kingdom and dependencies [ References ] [ External links ] [ Flags of Gibraltar ] [ gi Gibraltar ] Gibraltar Government Website Information On Flag Category:National symbols of Gibraltar Gibraltar Gibraltar Category:1982 introductions ar:علم جبل طارق be:Сцяг Гібралтара be-x-old:Сьцяг Гібральтару bs:Zastava Gibraltara cs:Gibraltarská vlajka cy:Baner Gibraltar da:Gibraltars flag de:Flagge Gibraltars et:Gibraltari lipp el:Σημαία του Γιβραλτάρ es:Bandera de Gibraltar eo:Flago de Ĝibraltaro eu:Gibraltarko bandera fa:پرچم جبل الطارق fr:Drapeau de Gibraltar ko:지브롤터의 기 hr:Zastava Gibraltara it:Bandiera di Gibilterra he:דגל גיברלטר hu:Gibraltár zászlaja mk:Знаме на Гибралтар nl:Vlag van Gibraltar ja:ジブラルタルの旗 no:Gibraltars flagg nn:Flagget til Gibraltar pl:Flaga Gibraltaru pt:Bandeira de Gibraltar ro:Drapelul Gibraltarului ru:Флаг Гибралтара sq:Flamuri i Gjibraltarit sk:Vlajka Gibraltáru sr:Застава Гибралтара sh:Zastava Gibraltara fi:Gibraltarin lippu sv:Gibraltars flagga th:ธงชาติยิบรอลตาร์ uk:Прапор Гібралтару yo:Flag of Gibraltar zh:直布罗陀旗帜