{ Qing Dynasty illustration. } [ Xiahou ] [ 夏侯霸 夏侯霸 ] Xiahou Ba (died 255-259), style name Zhongquan (仲權), was a military general of Cao Wei during the Three Kingdoms era of Chinese history. As the second son of Xiahou Yuan, he was from one of the leading military families at the time, but defected to the rival state of Shu Han (which is the regime responsible for his father&apos;s death) due to political instability at the capital Luoyang. [ Biography ] [ Service under Cao Wei ] [ Early career ] Xiahou Ba&apos;s parents were important figures in Cao Wei; his father, Xiahou Yuan, had fought alongside his distant cousin and founder of Wei, Cao Cao, since the start of the civil wars and was one of the most trusted of Cao&apos;s generals, and Xiahou Ba&apos;s mother was a sister-in-law of Cao Cao. After Xiahou Yuan was killed at Battle of Mount Dingjun in 219 at the hands of Shu general, Huang Zhong, most of his troops were placed under the command of Zhang He upon advice from Guo Huai, while his private militia and guards were succeeded by his five sons. Xiahou Ba since then displayed great hatred against Shu, and vowed to revenge for his father. { (渊为蜀所害，故霸常切齿，欲有报蜀意。) Yu Huan. Brief History of Wei. } In AD 220, Xiahou Yuan&apos;s eldest son Xiahou Heng was given his own fiefdom and honorific title, so Xiahou Ba succeeded to his father&apos;s hereditary title with a stipend of tax revenues from eight hundred households. In AD 230, when the Minister of Defense, Cao Zhen proposed a shift from defensive to offensive stance against Shu-Han, Lieutenant-General (偏将军) Xiahou Ba was named as the vanguard. { (子午之役，霸召为前锋) Yu Huan. Brief History of Wei. } He then led a force towards Hanzhong taking a route though the 330  km Ziwu Trail (子午道), and camped in a crooked gorge, near the Xingshi camp set up earlier by Shu general, Wei Yan. There, Xiahou was identified by the local residents, who reported his presence to the Shu forces, and was under heavy attack. As the main army of Cao Zhen had not caught up with the van, Xiahou was threw into a grave situation, where he was forced to rely on personal martial skill to fight his enemies between barricades until Cao arrived. { (霸手战鹿角间，赖救至，然后解。) Yu Huan. Brief History of Wei. } The two forces reached a stalemate and the standoff lasted for a few months, but the development favored Shu-Han side as continuous rainfall over a month had rendered narrow valleys impassable, resulting in Wei army&apos;s logistical difficulty. In addition to the disadvantageous weather, Wei Yan had pincered to Wei army&apos;s rear and successfully incited some non-Han tribes to oppose Cao-Wei, so Cao and Xiahou begrudgingly consented on the decision to retreat. Since then, Xiahou was made General-of-the-Right, and stationed in Longxi to train troops; he treated both his militia and common soldiers well, and gained their support. [ As a trusted aide of Cao Shuang ] In the 240s Xiahou became the Marquis of Bochangting and a known associate of Cao Shuang, who was the son of the deceased Cao Zhen and leader of the dominant faction in Wei politics. { (霸，正始中为讨蜀护军右将军，进封博昌亭侯，素为曹爽所厚) Chen Shou. Records of Three Kingdoms, Volume 9, Biography of Xiahou Yuan. } When Cao Shuang decided to wage war against Shu to enhance his personal influence and reputation, Xiahou was made Protector-of-the-Army and came under command of Xiahou Xuan, who was Xiahou Ba&apos;s son in the clan. { (至正始中，代夏侯儒为征蜀护军，统属征西。) Yu Huan. Brief History of Wei. } For the ensuing campaign, however, the honor of leading the van fell into the hands of Guo Huai, whom Xiahou Ba disliked. This time, Wei forces chose the shorter Tangluo Trail into Shu territory, but again experienced logistic problem as a long section of the trail had no water source. As a result, the Wei forces were forced to retreat, and many soldiers merely died of thirst along the way back. After the war, Guo, due to his timely withdrawal of troops, was granted a higher military authority over Xiahou Ba. { (淮度势不利，辄拔军出，故不大败。还假淮节。) Chen Shou. Records of Three Kingdoms, Volume 26, Biography of Guo Huai. } From AD 244 to 249, Xiahou Ba would play into the hands of Guo, who held authority to temporarily command him when a military crisis arose. In AD 247, when the leaders of Qiang tribe and Hu tribe rebelled against Wei, Xiahou Ba stationed at Weixi, and was under attack from Shu commander, Jiang Wei, who came to support the rebellion. Together with Guo, Xiahou repelled Jiang&apos;s attack, and struck the Qiang rebels, forcing many to submission. { (维果攻为翅，会淮军至，...斩饿何、烧弋，降服者万馀落。) Chen Shou. Records of Three Kingdoms. } However, E Zhesai (蛾遮塞) of Qiang, and Zhi Wudai (治无戴) of Hu still insisted on fighting, so the war was fragmented into battles that dragged on to 248, wherein Jiang Wei again led Shu forces to the aid of the rebels. At this point, it is clear that Guo, instead of Xiahou Xuan, was the actual commander on the field to give out orders; for instance, when Guo decided to attack Jiang&apos;s subordinate, Liao Hua, Xiahou Ba was ordered to tail Jiang&apos;s main troop to the west. { (乃别遣夏侯霸等追维于沓中，淮自率诸军就攻化等。) Chen Shou. Records of Three Kingdoms. } Upon knowing Liao was under attack, Jiang harshly returned to Liao&apos;s assistance just as Guo predicted, and the rebels severed ties with Shu. { ( &quot; 比维自致，足以定化，且使维疲于奔命。兵不远西，而胡交自离，此一举而两全之策也 &quot;...皆如淮计。) Chen Shou. Records of Three Kingdoms. } As Jiang was worn out from the travel, so was Xiahou Ba, but the glory and merit of subjugating the rebellion went to Guo Huai, who was made a Xianghou (Marquis of a village). On the contrary, Xiahou Ba virtually received nothing for his effort in the campaign. [ Service under Shu ] [ Journey to the west ] In 249, after a coup d&apos;état by Sima Yi against Cao Shuang, a lot of Cao&apos;s affiliates were also put to death; being a close friend and associate of Cao, Xiahou Ba was sensitive to the political development and grew suspicious of the Sima fraction. Soon, Xiahou Xuan, who had the staff of authority to command troops over Liang and Yong provinces, was called back to the capital in name of a promotion. Thus, Xiahou Ba discussed the issue with Xiahou Xuan, and persuaded the latter to flee with him to Shu-Han. But Xiahou Xuan refused and said &quot; I won&apos;t live as a guest in a kingdom of barbarians! (吾岂苟存自客於寇虏乎) &quot; What further perturbed Xiahou Ba was the person who succeeded Xiahou Xuan&apos;s former position was none other than Guo Huai, whom Xiahou Ba had a personal feud with. Therefore, Xiahou Ba started his lone journey into Shu. On his way to Shu, Xiahou lost his way and went into a dead end in a valley, where he ran out of food and was forced to kill his horse as a last resort. He kept walking until his leg was crippled, then he laid beneath a shadow from a large rock, and asked the travelers for direction, but his geometry still could not figure out how to get out from the dead end. { (入穷谷中，粮尽，杀马步行，足破，卧岩石下，使人求道，未知何之。) Yu Huan. Brief History of Wei. } When the locals reported the presence of a lame beggar who looked alike to the great general Xiahou Ba who attacked them years ago, the Shu emperor, Liu Shan, hurriedly sent a rescue team to escort his brother-in-law to his capital of Chengdu. Years ago, one of Xiahou Ba&apos;s sisters was abducted by Liu Bei &apos;s military general, Zhang Fei, and was &quot; made &quot; the wife of the latter. As a consequence, the Liu clan and Xiahou clan were linked together though Liu Shan &apos;s marriage with Zhang&apos;s daughter. That was why Liu Shan called his son &quot; Nephew of Xiahou Family &quot;. Whether it was a political reason or a family issue, Xiahou was promoted to General of Chariots and Cavalry, wherein general Xiahou no longer could ride a chariot nor a horse well. [ Later life in Shu ] Nevertheless, Jiang Wei apparently befriended this old countryman of his, and they went on several campaigns against their mother-country, and nearly failed all of them. The imperial court of Cao Wei, thus, pardoned Xiahou Ba&apos;s sons on account of Xiahou Yuan&apos;s role in the founding of the empire. Instead they were exiled to Lelang in present day North Korea. At the time Xiahou was already at his 60s (if not 70s), but he was still active in social life. A story about that was recorded in &quot; Folklore of Yi Regions, &quot; which says Xiahou wanted to befriend Zhang Ni, who was famous for subjugating the southern barbarians and was one of the most celebrated generals of Shu-Han back then. When Xiahou first met Zhang Ni, he told the latter: &quot; Although I&apos;m not close to you, I have already entrusted wholly to you for a long time, I hope you would understand this. &quot; Zhang Ni responded: &quot; I don&apos;t know you, and you don&apos;t know me. The rationale is on the other end, how can you say you rely on me? I hope you save your words and continue this talk three years later. &quot; { (夏侯霸谓嶷曰：“虽与足下疏阔，然讬心如旧，宜明此意。”嶷答曰：“仆未知子，子未知我，大道在彼，何云讬心乎！原三年之后徐陈斯言。”有识之士以为美谈。” ). 《益部耆旧传》Folklore of Yi Regions. } This incident was circulated within Shu, and knowledgeable persons and scholars agreed on Zhang&apos;s reply and took Xiahou as a joke. As a newcomer from Wei, Xiahou must have had faced discrimination and distrust from his colleagues, but due to his complicated background, he was trusted by Liu Shan, and highly valued by another defector of Wei, Jiang Wei. Once, Jiang asked Xiahou if Sima, who gained control of Wei court, would attack Shu, Xiahou replied: &quot; they just recently established hegemony, so they will not indulge in foreign affairs. However, there is a young Zhong Hui, who will be a threat to both kingdoms of Wu and Shu. &quot; { (“维问于霸曰：“司马懿既得彼政，当复有征伐之志不？”霸曰：“彼方营立家门，未遑外事。有钟士季者，其人虽少，若管朝政，吴、蜀之忧也。”) See the Zizhi Tongjian. } Believing Xiahou&apos;s views that Sima would not handle border issues for some time, Jiang revived Zhuge&apos;s strategy on constantly waging wars against Wei, and brought Xiahou with him on his expeditions. Xiahou distinguished himself in Jiang&apos;s only big victory in his campaigns, which was the Battle of Didao, after the battle, he was not mentioned again in historic records. According to Records of Three Kingdoms, Xiahou Ba succeeded Deng Zhi as the General of Chariots and Cavalry after his death in 251, and Zizhi Tongjian noted he was alive in 255. Records of Three Kingdoms noted Xiahou Ba was not alive in 259, when Liao Hua and Zhang Yi were described as his successors to the position, so Xiahou must have had died between 255 to 259. [ In fiction ] In Luo Guanzhong &apos;s historical novel Romance of the Three Kingdoms, Xiahou Ba&apos;s death was altered. When the invasion of Shu occurred in 262, Xiahou Ba defended Shu. At the Battle of Taoyang, he was killed by the arrows and stones that were thrown by the Wei forces laying in wait on the cliffs { http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:XiahouBa.jpg }. [ Modern references ] Xiahou Ba is first introduced as a playable character in the seventh installment of Koei &apos;s Dynasty Warriors video game series. [ See also ] List of people of the Three Kingdoms List of Dynasty Warriors characters [ Notes ] [ References ] Chen Shou. Records of Three Kingdoms, Volume 9, Biography of Xiahou Yuan. Chen Shou. Records of Three Kingdoms, Volume 44, Biography of Jiang Wei. Category:Shu Han generals Category:Cao Wei generals Category:250s deaths ca:Xiahou Ba de:Xiahou Ba ko:하후패 id:Xiahou Ba ja:夏侯覇 sh:Xiahou Ba th:แฮหัวป๋า vi:Hạ Hầu Bá zh-yue:夏侯霸 zh:夏侯霸