In human behavior, obedience (or hearsomeness ) is ‘a form of social influence in which a person yields to explicit instructions or orders from an authority figure’ (Coleman,2006)]] { Abate, Frank R. (Ed.). (1997). } [ Coleman A Oxford Dictionary of Psychology http://www.oxfordreference.com.chain.kent.ac.uk/views/SEARCH_RESULTS.html?q%3Dobedience%26amp%3Bcategory%3Dt87%26amp%3Bssid%3D391373388%26amp%3Bscope%3Dbook%26amp%3Btime%3D0.494804436609343. 13/02/2012 ] Obedience differs from compliance, which is behavior influenced by peers, and from conformity, which is behavior intended to match that of the majority. Obedience can be seen as both a sin and a virtue. For example in a situation when one orders a person to kill another innocent person and he or she does this willingly, it is a sin. However when one orders a person to kill an enemy who will end a lot of innocent lives and he or she does this willingly it can be deemed a virtue. Humans have been shown to be surprisingly obedient in the presence of perceived legitimate authority figures, as shown by the Milgram experiment in the 1960s, which was carried-out by Stanley Milgram to find how the Nazis managed to get ordinary people to take part in the mass murders of the Holocaust. The experiment showed that obedience to authority was the norm, not the exception. Regarding obedience, Stanley Milgram said that &quot; Obedience is as basic an element in the structure of social life as one can point to; Some system of authority is a requirement of all communal living, and it is only the man dwelling in isolation who is not forced to respond, through defiance or submission, to the commands of others. &quot; [ Milgram S. Behavioral study of obedience Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology 1963 67 371-378 ] A similar conclusion was reached in the Stanford prison experiment. [ Experimental studies ] [ Classical Methods and Results ] Although other fields have studied it, social psychology has been primarily responsible for the advancement of research on obedience. It has been studied experimentally in several different ways. [ Milgram experiment ] In one classical study, Stanley Milgram (as part of the Milgram Experiment ) created a highly controversial and often replicated study. The experiment involved Deception of the participants. In the experiment, participants were told they were going to contribute to a study about punishment and learning, but the actual focus was on how long they would listen to and obey orders from the experimenter. The participants were instructed that they had to shock a person in another room for every wrong answer on a learning task, and the shocks increased with intensity for each wrong answer. If participants questioned the procedure, the researcher would encourage them further. The dependent variable for this experiment was the amount of shocks administered. [ Milgram S. Behavioral study of obedience Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology 1963 67 371-378 ] [ Zimbardo experiment ] The other classical study on obedience was conducted at Stanford University during the 1970&apos;s. Phillip Zimbardo was the main psychologist responsible for the experiment. In the Stanford Prison Experiment, college age students were put into a pseudo prison environment in order to study the impacts of &quot; social forces &quot; on participants behavior. [ Haney C Banks, C., &amp; Zimbardo, P. Interpersonal dynamics in a simulated prison International Journal of Criminology and Penology 1973 1 69-97 ] Unlike the Milgram study in which each participant underwent the same experimental conditions, here using random assignment half the participants were prison guards and the other half were prisoners. The experimental setting was made to physically resemble a prison while simultaneously inducing &quot; a psychological state of imprisonment &quot;. [ Results ] The Milgram study found that participants would obey orders even when it posed severe harm to others. This result was surprising to Milgram because he thought that &quot; subjects have learned from childhood that it is a fundamental breach of moral conduct to hurt another person against his will &quot;. [ Milgram S. Behavioral study of obedience Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology 1963 67 371-378 ] Zimbardo found similar results as the guards in the study obeyed orders so much that their behavior turned aggressive. Prisoners likewise were hostile to and resented their guards, and because of the psychological duress induced in the experiment, it had to be shut down after only 6 days.. [ Modern Methods and Results ] The previous two studies greatly influenced how modern psychologists think about obedience. Milgram&apos;s study in particular generated a large response from the psychology community. In a modern study, Jerry Burger replicated Milgram&apos;s method with a few alterations. Burger&apos;s method was identical to Milgram&apos;s except when the shocks reached 150 volts, participants decided whether or not they wanted to continue and then the experiment ended (base condition). In the modeled refusal condition, two confederates were used, where one confederate acted as the learner and the other was the teacher. The teacher stopped after going up to 90 volts, and the participant was asked to continue where the confederate left off. This methodology was considered more ethical because many of the adverse psychological effects seen in previous studies&apos; participants occurred after moving past 150 volts. Additionally, since Milgram&apos;s study only used men, Burger tried to determine if there were differences between genders in his study and randomly assigned equal numbers of men and women to the experimental conditions. [ Burger Jerry Replicating Milgram: Would people still obey today? American Psychologist 2009 64 1-11 ]. Using data from his previous study, Burger probed participant&apos;s thoughts about obedience. Participants&apos; comments from the previous study were coded for the number of times they had comments pertaining to &quot; personal responsibility and the learner&apos;s well being &quot;. [ Burger Jerry Girgis, Z. &amp; Manning, C. In their own words: Explaining obedience to authority through an examination of participants&apos; comments Social Psychological and Personality Science 2011 2 460-466 ] The number of prods the participants used in the first experiment were also measured. Another study that used a partial replication of Milgram&apos;s work changed the experimental setting. In one of the Utrecht University studies on obedience, participants were instructed to make a confederate who was taking an employment test feel uncomfortable. Participants were told to make all of the instructed stress remarks to the confederate that ultimately made him fail in the experimental condition, but in the control condition they were not told to make all of the stress remarks. The dependent measurements were whether or not the participant made all of the stress remarks (measuring absolute obedience) and the number of stress remarks (relative obedience). [ Meeus Wim Quinten Raaijmakers Administrative obedience: Carrying out orders to use psychological-administrative violence European Journal of Social Psychology 1986 16 311-324 ] Following the Utrecht studies, another study used the stress remarks method to see how long participants would obey authority. The dependent measures for this experiment were the number of stress remarks made and a separate measure of personality designed to measure individual differences. [ Bocchiaro Piero Zimbardo, P. Defying unjust authority: An exploratory study Current Psychology 2010 29 155-170 ] [ Results ] Burger&apos;s first study had results similar to the ones found in Milgram&apos;s previous study. The rates of obedience were very similar to those found in the Milgram study, showing that participants&apos; tendency to obey has not declined over time. Additionally, Burger found that both genders exhibited similar behavior, suggesting that obedience will occur in participants independent of gender. In Burger&apos;s followup study, he found that participants that worried about the well being of the learner were more hesitant to continue the study. He also found that the more the experimenter prodded the participant to continue, the more likely they were to stop the experiment. The Utrecht University study also replicated Milgram&apos;s results. They found that although participants indicated they did not enjoy the task, over 90% of them completed the experiment. The Bocchiaro and Zimbardo study had similar levels of obedience compared to the Milgram and Utrecht studies. They also found that participants would either stop the experiment at the first sign of the learner&apos;s pleas or would continue until the end of the experiment (called &quot; the foot in the door scenario &quot; ). In addition to the above studies, additional research using participants from different cultures (including Spain, [ Miranda F. Caballero, B., Gomez, &amp; Zamorano M. Obediencia a la autoridad [Obedience to Authority] Psiquis 1981 2 212-221 ], Australia [ Kilham W. Mann, L. The level of destructive obedience as a function of transmitter and executant roles in the Milgram obedience paradigm Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 1974 29 696-702 ], and Jordan) [ Shanab M. Yahka, K. A cross-cultural study of obedience Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society 1978 11 530-536 ] also found participants to be obedient. [ Implications ] One of the major assumptions of obedience research is that the effect is caused only by the experimental conditions, and Thomas Blass&apos; research contests this point, as in some cases participant factors involving personality could potentially influence the results. [ Blass T Understanding behavior in the Milgram obedience experiment: The role of personality, situations and their interactions Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 1991 60 398-413 ] In one of Blass&apos; reviews on obedience, he found that participant&apos;s personalities can impact how they respond to authority [ Blass T Understanding behavior in the Milgram obedience experiment: The role of personality, situations and their interactions Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 1991 60 398-413 ], as people that were high in authoritarian submission were more likely to obey. [ Elms A. Milgram, S. Personality characteristics associated with obedience and defiance to authoritative command Journal of Experimental Research in Personality 1966 1966 282-289 ]. He replicated this finding in his own research, as in one of his experiments, he found that when watching portions of the original Milgram studies on film, participants placed less responsibility on those punishing the learner when they scored high on measures of authoritarianism. [ Blass T. Right-wing authoritarianism and role as predictors of attributions about obedience to authority Journal of Personality and Individual Differences 1995 1 99-100 ] In addition to personality factors, participants who are resistant to obeying authority had high levels of social intelligence [ Burley P McGuinnes, J. Effects of social intelligence on the Milgram paradigm Psychological Reports 1977 40 767-770 ]. [ Applications of Obedience Research ] Obedience can also be studied outside of the Milgram paradigm in fields such as economics or political science. One economics study that compared obedience to a tax authority in the lab versus at home found that participants were much more likely to pay participation tax when confronted in the lab. [ Cadsby B. Maynes, E., Trivedi, V. Tax compliance and obedience to authority at home and in the lab: A new experimental approach Experimental Economics 2006 9 343-359 ] This finding implies that even outside of experimental settings, people will forgo potential financial gain to obey authority. Another study involving political science measured public opinion before and after a Supreme Court case debating whether or not states can legalize physician assisted suicide. They found that participants&apos; tendency to obey authorities was not as important to public opinion polling numbers as religious and moral beliefs. [ Skitka L. Bauman, C., Lytle, B. Limits of legitimacy: Moral and religious convictions as constraints on deference to authority Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 2009 97 567-578 ]. Although prior research has demonstrated that the tendency to obey persists across settings, this finding suggests that at personal factors like religion and morality can limit how much people obey authority. [ Other Experimental Research ] [ The Hofling hospital experiment (field research) ] [ Hofling hospital experiment ] Both the Milgram and Stanford experiments were conducted in experimental circumstances. In 1966, psychiatrist Charles K. Hofling published the results of a field experiment on obedience in the nurse–physician relationship in its natural hospital setting. Nurses, unaware they were taking part in an experiment, were ordered by unknown doctors to administer dangerous doses of a (fictional) drug to their patients. Although several hospital rules disallowed administering the drug under the circumstances, 25 out of the 26 nurses would have given the patient an overdose of medicine. { Hofling C.K. et al. (1966) &quot; An Experimental Study of Nurse-Physician Relationships &quot;. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease 141: 171–80. } [ Cultural Attitudes to Obedience ] Obedience is the tendency to follow orders given by an authority figure. This can be explained by Milgram&apos;s Agency Theory, which states that we are in either one of two states. Forms of human obedience include: BDSM; and obedience to management in the workplace. [ Cultural attitudes to obedience ] Obedience is regarded as a virtue in many traditional cultures; historically, children have been expected to be obedient to their elders, slaves to their owners, serfs to their lords in feudal society, lords to their king, and everyone to God. Even long after slavery ended in the United States, the Black codes required black people to obey and submit to whites, on pain of lynching. In some Christian wedding s, obedience was formally included along with honor and love as part of a conventional bride&apos;s (but not the bridegroom&apos;s) wedding vow. This came under attack with women&apos;s suffrage and the feminist movement. Today its inclusion in marriage vows is optional in some denomination s. As the middle class es have gained political power, the power of authority has been progressively eroded, with the introduction of democracy as a major turning point in attitudes to obedience and authority. [ January 2007 ] Since the democide s and genocide s of the First World War and Second World War periods, obedience has come to be regarded as a far less desirable quality in Western cultures. The civil rights and protest movements in the second half of the 20th century marked a remarkable reduction in respect for authority in Western cultures, and greater respect for individual ethical judgment as a basis for moral decisions. [ January 2007 ] [ Obedience training of human beings ] [ Socialization Military training ] Some animals can easily be trained to be obedient by employing operant conditioning, for example obedience school s exist to condition dog s into obeying the orders of human owners. Obedience training seems to be particularly effective on social animal s, [ January 2007 ] a category that includes human beings; other animals do not respond well to such training. Learning to obey adult rules is a major part of the socialization process in childhood, and many techniques are used by adults to modify the behavior of children. Additionally, extensive training is given in armies to make soldiers capable of obeying orders in situations where an untrained person would not be willing to follow orders. Soldiers are initially ordered to do seemingly trivial things, such as picking up the sergeant&apos;s hat off the floor, marching in just the right position, or marching and standing in formation. The orders gradually become more demanding, until an order to the soldiers to place themselves into the midst of gunfire gets an instinctively obedient response. [ Factors affecting obedience ] [ Embodiment of prestige or power ] Obedience occurs in several situations; most often referred to is the obedience of soldiers to a superior officer. When the Milgram experimenters were interviewing potential volunteers, the participant selection process itself revealed several factors that affected obedience, outside of the actual experiment. Interviews for eligibility were conducted in an abandoned complex in Bridgeport, Connecticut. [ Milgram S. Behavioral study of obedience Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology 1963 67 371-378 ] [ Berstein D.A. Psychology 1988 Houghton Mifflin Company ] Despite the dilapidated state of the building, the researchers found that the presence of a Yale professor as stipulated in the advertisement affected the number of people who obeyed. This was not further researched to test obedience without a Yale professor because Milgram had not intentionally staged the interviews to discover factors that affected obedience. [ Milgram S. Behavioral study of obedience Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology 1963 67 371-378 ] A similar conclusion was reached in the Stanford prison experiment. [ Berstein D.A. Psychology 1988 Houghton Mifflin Company ] In the actual experiment, prestige or the appearance of power was a direct factor in obedience—particularly the presence of men dressed in gray laboratory coats, which gave the impression of scholarship and achievement and was thought to be the main reason why people complied with administering what they thought was a painful shock. [ Milgram S. Behavioral study of obedience Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology 1963 67 371-378 ] A similar conclusion was reached in the Stanford prison experiment. Raj Persaud, in an article in the BMJ, { The Man Who Shocked the World: The Life and Legacy of Stanley Milgram, Raj Persaud, BMJ 2005;331;356-, } [ 10.1136/bmj.331.7512.356 ] comments on Milgram&apos;s attention to detail in his experiment: [ The research was also conducted with amazing verve and subtlety—for example, Milgram ensured that the &quot; experimenter &quot; wear a grey lab coat rather than a white one, precisely because he did not want subjects to think that the &quot; experimenter &quot; was a medical doctor and thereby limit the implications of his findings to the power of physician authority. ] Despite the fact that prestige is often thought of as a separate factor, it is, in fact, merely a subset of power as a factor. Thus, the prestige conveyed by a Yale professor in a laboratory coat is only a manifestation of the experience and status associated with it and/or the social status afforded by such an image. [ See also ] In humans: [ 75% ] Authority Codependency Conformity Depersonalization Civil disobedience Dominance hierarchy Submissive Sycophancy Vow of obedience In animals: Animal training Obedience training (for dogs) Horse breaking [ References ] [ External links ] [ Obedience ] Science Aid: Obedience High school level Psychology Catholic Encyclopedia article on obedience Category:Behavior Category:Social psychology br:Sentidigezh cs:Poslušnost de:Gehorsam es:Obediencia fr:Obéissance gl:Obediencia (actitude) it:Obbedienza nl:Gehoorzaamheid pt:Obediência ru:Послушание (поведение) sv:Lydnad th:การเชื่อฟัง tr:İtaat