[ Gull-billed Tern LC LC IUCN3.1 Gull-billed Tern.jpg Animal ia Chordata Aves Charadriiformes Sternidae Gelochelidon C.L. Brehm, 1830 G. nilotica Gelochelidon nilotica ( Gmelin, 1789) ] The Gull-billed Tern (Gelochelidon nilotica) formerly Sterna nilotica (Bridge et al., 2005), is a seabird of the tern family Sternidae. It is now considered to be in its own genus. [ Description ] This is a fairly large and powerful tern, similar in size and general appearance to a Sandwich Tern, but the short thick gull-like bill, broad wings, long legs and robust body are distinctive. The summer adult has grey upperparts, white underparts, a black cap, strong black bill and black legs. The call is a characteristic ker-wik. It is [ 33 - 42 cm in on ] in length and [ 76 - 91 cm in on ] in wingspan. { (2011). } Body mass ranges from [ 150 - 292 g oz on ]. { CRC Handbook of Avian Body Masses by John B. Dunning Jr. (Editor). CRC Press (1992), ISBN 978-0-8493-4258-5. } In winter, the cap is lost, and there is a dark patch through the eye like a Forster&apos;s Tern or a Mediterranean Gull. Juvenile Gull-billed Terns have a fainter mask, but otherwise look much like winter adults. Juvenile Sandwich Terns have a short bill, and are frequently mistaken for Gull-billed Tern where the latter species is uncommon, such as North Sea coasts. [ Range ] It breeds in warmer parts of the world in southern Europe (and a very small isolated population in northern Germany and Denmark ), temperate and eastern Asia, both coasts of North America, eastern South America and Australia. This bird has a number of geographical races, differing mainly in size and minor plumage details. All forms show a post-breeding dispersal, but the northern breeders are most migratory, wintering south to Africa, the Caribbean and northern South America, southern Asia and New Zealand. The Gull-billed Tern is one of the species to which the Agreement on the Conservation of African-Eurasian Migratory Waterbirds ( AEWA ) applies. [ Life history ] { Chilika, } { Orissa, } { India. } { Chilika, } { Orissa, } { India. } This species breeds in colonies on lakes, marshes and coasts. It nests in a ground scrape and lays two to five eggs. While widely distributed in freshwater areas in Eurasia, it is associated almost solely with saltwater, coastal areas in North America. { (2011). } This is a somewhat atypical tern, in appearance like a Sterna tern, but with feeding habits more like the Chlidonias marsh terns, Black Tern and White-winged Tern. It used to be grouped in the genus Sterna but is now placed on its own in the genus Gelochelidon. The Gull-billed Tern does not normally plunge dive for fish like the other white terns, and has a broader diet than most other terns. It largely feeds on insects taken in flight, and also often hunts over wet fields and even in brushy areas, to take amphibians and small mammals, as well as small birds and the chicks and eggs of other terns. [ References ] [ BirdLife International 2004 49250 Sterna nilotica 11 May 2006 ] Bridge, E. S.; Jones, A. W. &amp; Baker, A. J. (2005): A phylogenetic framework for the terns (Sternini) inferred from mtDNA sequences: implications for taxonomy and plumage evolution. Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 35: 459–469. PDF fulltext Collinson, M. (2006). Splitting headaches? Recent taxonomic changes affecting the British and Western Palaearctic lists. British Birds 99(6): 306-323. Harrison, Peter (1988): Seabirds (2nd edition). Christopher Helm, London ISBN 0-7470-1410-8 National Geographic Society (2002): Field Guide to the Birds of North America. National Geographic, Washington DC. ISBN 0-7922-6877-6 Olsen, Klaus Malling &amp; Larsson, Hans (1995): Terns of Europe and North America. Christopher Helm, London. ISBN 0-7136-4056-1 [ External links ] [ Gelochelidon nilotica ] [ Gelochelidon nilotica ] Photo Field Guide on Flickr [ Various views and plumages ] Gelochelidon nilotica in Krishna Wildlife Sanctuary, Andhra Pradesh, India. SW Queensland, Australia Category:Sternidae Category:Genera of birds Category:Monotypic bird genera Category:Birds of Europe Category:Birds of Turkey Category:Birds of Pakistan Category:Birds of South Australia Category:Birds of Western Australia Category:Animals described in 1789 Category:Birds of Western Sahara az:Qağayıbaş susüpürən ba:Керелдәк сарлаҡ br:Skrav beg tev bg:Дебелоклюна рибарка ca:Curroc cs:Rybák černozobý de:Lachseeschwalbe et:Naerutiir es:Gelochelidon nilotica eo:Mevbeka ŝterno eu:Txenada mokobeltz fr:Sterne hansel it:Gelochelidon nilotica hu:Kacagócsér ms:Burung Camar Tiram mn:Бахим амуулай nl:Lachstern ja:ハシブトアジサシ no:Sandterne pnb:گل دی چنج آلی ٹرن pms:Gelochelidon nilotica pl:Rybitwa krótkodzioba pt:Gaivina-de-bico-preto ru:Чайконосая крачка fi:Hietatiira sv:Sandtärna tr:Gülen sumru