[ Saint Apollonia unknown 249 February 9 Eastern Orthodox Church Roman Catholic Church Coptic Church Francisco de Zurbarán 035.jpg 200px Saint Apollonia, by Francisco de Zurbarán. Alexandria, Egypt Virgin &amp; Martyr Tongs (sometimes with a tooth in them), depicted holding a cross or martyr&apos;s palm or crown Dentist s Tooth problems Achterbos, Belgium Ariccia, Italy Cuccaro Monferrato, Italy ] Saint Apollonia was one of a group of virgin martyrs who suffered in Alexandria during a local uprising against the Christian s prior to the persecution of Decius. According to legend, her torture included having all of her teeth violently pulled out or shattered. For this reason, she is popularly regarded as the patroness of dentistry and those suffering from toothache or other dental problems. French court painter Jehan Fouquet painted the scene of St. Apollonia&apos;s torture in The Martyrdom of St. Apollonia. { Olmert, Michael (1996). Milton&apos;s Teeth and Ovid&apos;s Umbrella: Curiouser &amp; Curiouser Adventures in History, p.66. Simon &amp; Schuster, New York. ISBN 0-684-80164-7. } [ Martyrdom ] { Heilsbronn Cathedral, } { Bavaria ). } Ecclesiastical historians have claimed that in the last years of Emperor Philip the Arab (reigned 244–249), during otherwise undocumented festivities to commemorate the millennium of the founding of Rome (traditionally in 753 BC, putting the date about AD 248), the fury of the Alexandrian mob rose to a great height, and when one of their poet s prophesied a calamity, they committed bloody outrages on the Christians, whom the authorities made no effort to protect. Dionysius, Bishop of Alexandria (247–265), relates the sufferings of his people in a letter addressed to Fabius, Bishop of Antioch, of which long extracts have been preserved in Eusebius &apos; Historia Ecclesiae. { Eusebius of Caesarea, Historia Ecclesiae, I:vi: 41. } After describing how a Christian man and woman, Metras and Quinta, were seized and killed by the mob, and how the houses of several other Christians were pillaged, Dionysius continues: &quot; At that time Apollonia, parthénos presbytis (dedicated virgin; a nun) was held in high esteem. These men seized her also and by repeated blows broke all her teeth. They then erected outside the city gates a pile of fagots and threatened to burn her alive if she refused to repeat after them impious words (either a blasphemy against Christ, or an invocation of the heathen gods). Given, at her own request, a little freedom, she sprang quickly into the fire, but miracolously the fire did not do harm her. She ended up decapitated. &quot; This brief tale was extended and moralized in Jacobus de Voragine &apos;s Golden Legend (c. 1260). { Fresco of Saint Apollonia (St. Nicholas Church, } { Stralsund ). } Apollonia and a whole group of early martyrs did not await the death they were threatened with, but either to preserve their chastity or because they were confronted with the alternative of renouncing their faith or suffering death, voluntarily embraced the death prepared for them, an action that runs perilously close to suicide, some thought. Augustine of Hippo touches on this question in the first book of The City of God, apropos suicide: &quot; But, they say, during the time of persecution certain holy women plunged into the water with the intention of being swept away by the waves and drowned, and thus preserve their threatened chastity. Although they quitted life in this wise, nevertheless they receive high honour as martyrs in the Catholic Church and their feasts are observed with great ceremony. This is a matter on which I dare not pass judgment lightly. For I know not but that the Church was divinely authorized through trustworthy revelations to honour thus the memory of these Christians. It may be that such is the case. May it not be, too, that these acted in such a manner, not through human caprice but on the command of God, not erroneously but through obedience, as we must believe in the case of Samson ? When, however, God gives a command and makes it clearly known, who would account obedience there to a crime or condemn such pious devotion and ready service? &quot; Augustine of Hippo, The City of God, I:26 The narrative of Dionysius does not suggest the slightest reproach as to this act of St. Apollonia; in his eyes she was as much a martyr as the others, and as such she was revered in the Alexandrian Church. In time, her feast was also popular in the West. A later narrative mistakenly duplicated Apollonia, making her a Christian virgin of Rome in the reign of Julian the Apostate, suffering the same dental fate. [ Veneration ] { Reliquary containing a tooth reputedly that of Saint Apollonia, in the } { Cathedral of Porto, } { Portugal. } The Eastern Orthodox and Roman Catholic Churches celebrate the feast day of St. Apollonia on February 9, and she is popularly invoked against the toothache because of the torments she had to endure. She is represented in art with pincers in which a tooth is held. In a late 14th century illumination from a French manuscript, the tooth in her pincers glows from within, like a lightbulb. [ January 2012 ] Saint Apollonia is one of the two patron saint s of Catania. In Germany, where the Fourteen Holy Helpers (vierzehn heiligen) or Nothelfer are singled out as the patron saints of daily life, Apollonia, protectress against toothache, is one of them. [ January 2012 ] William S. Walsh noted that, though the major part of her relics were preserved in the former church of St. Apollonia at Rome, her head at the Basilica di Santa Maria in Trastevere, her arms at the Basilica di San Lorenzo fuori le Mura, parts of her jaw in St. Basil&apos;s, and other relics are in the Jesuit church at Antwerp, in St. Augustine&apos;s at Brussels, in the Jesuit church at Mechlin, in St. Cross at Liege, in the treasury of the cathedral of Porto, and in several churches at Cologne. { William S. Walsh, Curiosities of Popular Customs And of Rites, Ceremonies, Observances, and Miscellaneous Antiquities, 1897 } These relics consist in some cases of a solitary tooth or a splinter of bone. In the Middle Ages, objects claimed to be her teeth were sold as toothache cures. During the reign of Henry VI of England, several tons of these purported teeth were collected in an effort to stop the scam. [ January 2012 ] There was a church dedicated to her in Rome, near the Basilica di Santa Maria in Trastevere, but it no longer exists. Only its little square, the Piazza Sant&apos;Apollonia remains. One of the principal train stations of Lisbon is also named for this saint. There is a statue of Saint Apollonia in the church at Locronan, France. The island of Mauritius was originally named Santa Apolónia in her honor in 1507 by Portuguese navigators. [ January 2012 ] [ Presence in England ] In England, there are 52 known images of her in various churches which survived the ravages of the 16th century Commissioners. These are concentrated in Devon and East Anglia. Most of these images are on the panels of rood screens or featured in stained glass with only one being a stone capital ( Stokeinteignhead, Devon). The stained glass image in Kingskerswell church By county, some of the locations are: Cornwall : Poundstock Devon: Alphington (now gone), Ashton, Combe Martin, Exeter Cathedral (tapestry in St. Gabriel&apos;s chapel), Holne, Kenn, Kenton, Kingskerswell (see photo), Manaton, Payhembury, South Milton, Stoke-in-Teignhead, Torbryan, Ugborough, Whimple (now gone), Widecombe-in-the-Moor, Wolborough (Newton Abbot) Lincolnshire : Long Sutton Norfolk : Barton Turf, Docking, Horsham St Faith, Ludham, Norwich (St. Stephen&apos;s), Norwich-over-the-water (church disused), Sandringham Suffolk: Norton, Somerleyton, Westhall, Chiltern Her image is the side support of the arms of the British Dental Association. [ References ] [ Catholicism Dentistry ] [ Saint Apollonia ] Attwater, Donald and Catherine Rachel John. The Penguin Dictionary of Saints. 3rd edition. New York: Penguin Books, 1993. ISBN 0-14-051312-4. Beal, John F. Representations of St Apollonia in British Churches. Dental Historian vol 30, pp 3–19, (1996). Snuggs, Grace (Grace Miranda, DDS).Saint Apollonia, Patron Saint of Dentistry. Santa Apolonia, Patrona De Odontólogos y Enfermedades Dentales. Dental World.http://dentalw.com/papers/general/apolo.htm [ Apollonia 249 Alexandria, Egypt ] Category:249 deaths Category:Egyptian Roman Catholic saints Category:Dentistry Category:Egyptian saints Category:3rd-century Christian martyr saints Category:4th-century Christian female saints ca:Apol·lònia d&apos;Alexandria da:Apollonia (helgen) de:Apollonia von Alexandria es:Apolonia de Alejandría fr:Apolline d&apos;Alexandrie ko:아폴로니아 id:Apolonia it:Apollonia di Alessandria he:אפולוניה הקדושה hu:Szent Apollónia nl:Apollonia van Alexandrië ja:アポロニア (聖人) no:Apollonia av Alexandria pl:Apolonia z Aleksandrii pt:Santa Apolónia ru:Аполлония Александрийская sv:Apollonia (helgon)