[ Water Sports the video game Water Sports (video game) the paraphilia Urolagnia ] File:Water sports composite.jpg|350px|thumb|A variety of water sports rect 4 1 966 635 Diving rect 0 643 969 1247 Synchronized swimming rect 0 1248 970 1982 Yacht racing rect 967 1346 2145 1987 Dragon boat racing rect 2143 1347 3062 1987 Kayaking rect 969 0 2044 644 Surfing rect 969 643 2051 1346 Swimming rect 2047 652 3062 1347 Rowing rect 2044 0 3062 650 Water polo desc bottom-right There are a large number of sport s that involve water. The following is a list of water sports, divided by category. These categories are based on the relation of the sports to the water. Some of the sports include only one part related to swimming, such as a triathlon. [ In the water ] Swimming, including pool swimming and open water swimming Diving off springboard s or off platforms Modern pentathlon includes épée fencing, pistol shooting, swimming, a show jumping course on horseback, and cross country running Rescue swimming is swimming with the goal to rescue other swimmers or the practice thereof. Snorkeling is the practice of swimming at the surface (typically of the sea ) being equipped with a mask, fins, and a short tube called a snorkel. Synchronized diving Synchronized swimming is a hybrid of swimming, gymnastics, and ballet. Triathlon, a multi-sport event involving the completion of three continuous and sequential endurance events, usually a combination of swimming, cycling and running Waboba is played with a waboba ball on beaches or in pools. Water aerobics is aerobics in the water. Water polo is a team sport played in water. [ On the water ] [ Surface water sports ] Barefoot skiing is waterskiing with no skis Boat ing is the use of boats Bodyboarding is similar to surfing, but the board is smaller and the person (normally) lies down on the board Canoe ing Fishing is the recreation and sport of catching fish Flowboarding Jet Ski ing Kayak ing Kiteboating Kitesurfing on flat water using a kite for propulsion Parasailing where a person is towed behind a vehicle (usually a boat) while attached to a parachute Rafting Rowing Sailing using the wind for propulsion Sit-down hydrofoil ing is riding on the water with a hydrofoil attached to a ski Skimboarding is a boardsport in which a board is used to ride on an incoming wave Skurfing is where the participant &quot; skurfs &quot; behind a boat on a surfboard Stand up paddle surfing a surf style board with a paddle, used in flatwater or waves Surfing downhill on ocean wave s or artificial wave s in an wave pool Wakeboarding is similar to water skiing, but using only one board attached to the feet Wakeskating is similar to wakeboarding, but the board is not attached to the feet Wakesurfing is a mix between wakeboarding and surfing Waterskiing is using skis to slide over the water while being pulled by a boat or other device White water rafting Windsurfing on flat water using wind for propulsion in combination with sails Yachting sailing on yachts, daysailing, cruising or Yacht racing [ Under water ] [ Underwater sports Recreational diving ] Underwater hockey is hockey played under water with short wooden curved sticks and a heavy puck.Players wear diving masks, snorkels, and fins, and must surface to breathe while team mates continue the game on the pool bottom. Underwater photography, including underwater videography, is photography done under water. Numerous contests worldwide are arranged every year. Digital camera s have revolutionized how many divers participate. Underwater rugby is rugby played under water. Two teams try to score goals by sending a slightly negatively buoyant ball into the opponents&apos; goal, which is situated on the bottom of the pool. [ See also ] [ Water sports ] Outdoor recreation Outline of canoeing and kayaking [ References ] [ Water sports ] Water Sports Dictionaries Water * ca:Esports aquàtics da:Vandsport de:Wassersport el:Υγρός στίβος es:Anexo:Deportes acuáticos eo:Akvosporto fr:Sports nautiques ko:수상 스포츠 hi:जलक्रीडाओं की सूची id:Daftar olahraga air is:Vatnaíþróttir it:Sport acquatici he:ספורט ימי ms:Senarai sukan air nl:Watersport nds-nl:Waetersport ja:ウォータースポーツ no:Vannsport pl:Sporty wodne ru:Водные виды спорта simple:List of water sports sv:Vattensport uk:Водні види спорту zh:水類運動