The term speaker is a title often given to the presiding officer (chair) of a deliberative assembly, especially a legislative body. The speaker&apos;s official role is to moderate debate, make rulings on procedure, announce the results of votes, and the like. The speaker decides who may speak and has the powers to discipline members who break the procedures of the house. The speaker often also represents the body in person, as the voice of the body in ceremonial and some other situations. The title was first recorded in 1377 to describe the role of Thomas de Hungerford in the Parliament of England. By convention, Speakers are normally addressed in Parliament as Mister Speaker, if a man, or Madam Speaker, if a woman. In most other cultures other styles are used, mainly language equivalents of English &quot; chairman &quot; or &quot; president &quot;. In Canadian French, the Speaker of the House of Commons or of a legislature is referred to as Président. Many bodies also have a speaker pro tempore or deputy speaker, designated to fill in when the speaker is not available. [ United Kingdom and other &quot; Westminster system &quot; countries ] [ Speaker of the House of Commons (United Kingdom) Lord Speaker Speaker of the House of Commons of Canada Speaker of the Canadian Senate Speaker of the Australian House of Representatives President of the Australian Senate Ceann Comhairle Cathaoirleach ] In Westminster-style chambers, the speaker does not have a deliberative vote, but only a tiebreaker. In some countries such as the United Kingdom and the Republic of Ireland, this has developed into a convention of scrupulous political neutrality and the speaker resigns from his party, votes only by convention to ensure the government does not fall, and is either not challenged (in the UK) or automatically deemed elected if re-election is sought (in Ireland). Despite these conventions, the speaker is usually elected from among the members of the assembly by the members, and whips are not allowed to be among the selection. In the United Kingdom, a speaker is normally chosen from one of the two largest parties. These conventions do not apply in all countries. In Canada, major parties routinely field candidates against a speaker seeking re-election, although there have been exceptions such as the 1968 general election when the parties agreed not to nominate candidates in then-speaker Lucien Lamoureux&apos;s constituency. In Australia, the speakership is a partisan position and the politically neutral position of the UK has been criticised by the Clerk of the Senate as potentially disenfranchising voters in the Speaker&apos;s seat. { The Australian. (2010-08-31). Independent speaker not fair on voters, warns Clerk of Senate. Retrieved 2010-08-31. } Upper Houses in Westminster style Parliaments often have a presiding office which works differently, following the different conventions that apply in the British House of Lords. The officer may still be titled Speaker, as (since 2006) in the House of Commons, or use a different title, such as &quot; President &quot; as in the Australian Senate. [ United States ] [ Speaker of the United States House of Representatives ] In the United States, in the House of Representatives, and in state legislatures and local government councils, the speaker is usually selected by the members of the majority party and functions as a leader of that party. Thus, though speakers are supposed to be fair, they use procedural rulings to advance the agenda of their own party. Ceremonially, the speaker represents the whole house, but politically is the legislative voice of the party in power. There is one prominent case of a speaker who is not presiding officer. The New York City Council, the unicameral legislative body for New York City, has as its presiding officer the Public Advocate, a position formerly known as City Council President, who is elected by all the voters of the city. As the public advocate&apos;s role has changed with several city charter revisions, a post of Council Speaker was created. The speaker is, effectively, majority leader of the council. The Speaker of the House of Representatives is second in the presidential line of succession, becoming President of the United States if the president and Vice President are unable to serve. Some scholars, however, have argued that this provision of the succession statute is unconstitutional. { See Akhil Reed Amar &amp; Vikram Amar, Is The Presidential Succession Law Constitutional?, 48 Stan. L. Rev. 113 (1995). This issue is discussed in the entry on the } { United States Presidential Line of Succession } The Speaker of the United States House of Representatives is currently John Boehner. The Constitution does not require that the Speaker be an elected Member of Congress. No non-member has ever been elected Speaker. According to the Constitution, the Senate is presided over by the Vice President of the United States as ex officio President of the Senate. In practice, this role is delegated to a Senator elected as President pro tempore, who normally further delegates to a deputy. [ Similar posts ] The presiding officer for an upper house of a bicameral legislature usually has a different title, although substantially the same duties. When the upper house is called a senate, the equivalent title is often President of the Senate. Australia, Chile, the United States and many other countries have upper houses with presiding officers titled &quot; president &quot;. In several American republics, the vice president of the country serves as the president of the upper house. This pattern is not universal, however. Some upper houses, including those of Canada and several U.S. states (including Tennessee ), have a speaker. In the United Kingdom, the presiding officer of the House of Lords was until recently the Lord Chancellor, who was also a member of the government (a cabinet member) and the head of the judicial branch. The Lord Chancellor did not have the same authority to discipline members of the Lords that the speaker of the Commons has in that house. (On 4 July 2006 the office was reformed, and the Baroness Hayman took the woolsack as the first Lord Speaker.) (The office of Lord Chancellor remains, though with a modified role and duties.) The Presiding Officer of the National Assembly for Wales, Presiding Officer of the Scottish Parliament and Presiding Officer of the Northern Ireland Assembly fulfil the same role as the speaker. [ List of current Speakers ] [ section February 2012 ] [ 01 September confirmed as date for Vanuatu Presidential Election http://www.islandsbusiness.com/news/index_dynamic/containerNameToReplace%3DMiddleMiddle/focusModuleID%3D130/focusContentID%3D16428/tableName%3DmediaRelease/overideSkinName%3DnewsArticle-full.tpl Islands Business 2009-09-02 2009-08-20 ] Country Legislature (or legislative chamber) Title Incumbent Armenia National Assembly of Armenia Speaker Hovik Abrahamyan Australia Australian House of Representatives Speaker Peter Slipper Bangladesh Bangladesh Jatiyo Sangshad Speaker Abdul Hamid Botswana National Assembly of Botswana Speaker Margaret Nasha Bulgaria National Assembly of Bulgaria Chairperson Tsetska Tsacheva Canada House of Commons of Canada Speaker (Président) Andrew Scheer  » Alberta Legislative Assembly of Alberta Speaker Ken Kowalski  » British Columbia Legislative Assembly of British Columbia Speaker Bill Barisoff  » Manitoba Legislative Assembly of Manitoba Speaker George Hickes  » New Brunswick Legislative Assembly of New Brunswick Speaker Roy Boudreau  » Newfoundland and Labrador House of Assembly of Newfoundland and Labrador Speaker Roger Fitzgerald  » Northwest Territories Legislative Assembly of Northwest Territories Speaker Paul Delorey  » Nova Scotia Nova Scotia House of Assembly Speaker Gordie Gosse  » Nunavut Legislative Assembly of Nunavut Speaker James Arreak  » Ontario Legislative Assembly of Ontario Speaker Dave Levac  » Prince Edward Island Legislative Assembly of Prince Edward Island Speaker Kathleen M. Casey  » Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan Speaker Don Toth  » Quebec Quebec National Assembly President Jacques Chagnon  » Yukon Yukon Legislative Assembly Speaker Ted Staffen China National People&apos;s Congress Chairman of the Standing Committee Wu Bangguo  » Hong Kong Legislative Council of Hong Kong President Tsang Yok Sing  » Macau Legislative Assembly of Macau President Susana Chou Croatia Croatian Parliament &apos;&apos;(Sabor)&apos;&apos; President Boris Šprem Denmark Parliament of Denmark ( Folketinget ) Speaker Mogens Lykketoft Egypt People&apos;s Assembly Speaker Saad El-Katatny Estonia Riigikogu Speaker Ene Ergma Finland Parliament of Finland (eduskunta/riksdagen) Speaker Eero Heinäluoma France National Assembly (Assemblée Nationale) President Bernard Accoyer Ghana Parliament of Ghana Speaker Mrs. Justice Joyce Adeline Bamford-Addo Germany Bundestag President Norbert Lammert Greece Vouli Speaker Philippos Petsalnikos Hungary National Assembly of Hungary (Magyar Köztársaság Országgyűlése) Speaker László Kövér Iceland Parliament of Iceland Speaker Ásta Ragnheiður Jóhannesdóttir India Lok Sabha Speaker Meira Kumar Indonesia People&apos;s Representative Council (Dewan Perwakilan Rakyat) Speaker Marzuki Alie Ireland Dáil Éireann Ceann Comhairle Seán Barrett Iran Majlis of Iran Speaker Ali Larijani Israel Knesset Speaker Reuven Rivlin Italy Italian Chamber of Deputies President Gianfranco Fini Kenya Parliament of Kenya Speaker Kenneth Marende Kosovo Assembly of Kosovo Chairman Jakup Krasniqi Latvia Saeima Speaker Solvita Āboltiņa Lebanon Parliament of Lebanon Speaker Nabih Berri Liechtenstein Landtag of Liechtenstein Speaker Arthur Brunhart Lithuania Seimas Speaker Irena Degutienė Macedonia Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia Speaker Trajko Veljanovski Malaysia House of Representatives of Malaysia (Dewan Rakyat) Speaker Tan Sri Pandikar Amin Mulia Malta House of Representatives of Malta Speaker Michael Frendo Mexico Chamber of Deputies (Cámara de Diputados) President Ruth Zavaleta Salgado Moldova Parliament President Marian Lupu Montenegro Assembly of Montenegro President Ranko Krivokapić Netherlands House of Representatives of the Netherlands President Gerdi Verbeet New Zealand House of Representatives Speaker Dr Lockwood Smith Nigeria National Assembly of Nigeria Speaker acting Aminu Tambuwal Pakistan National Assembly of Pakistan Speaker Dr. Fahmida Mirza Philippines House of Representatives of the Philippines Speaker Feliciano Belmonte Poland Sejm of the Republic of Poland Marshal Ewa Kopacz Portugal Assembly of the Republic President Maria da Assunção Esteves Romania Chamber of Deputies of Romania President Roberta Anastase Russia State Duma Chairman Boris Gryzlov Serbia National Assembly of the Republic of Serbia President Slavica Đukić Dejanović Singapore Parliament of Singapore Speaker Michael Palmer Slovakia National Council of the Slovak Republic Speaker Pavol Paška Solomon Islands National Parliament of Solomon Islands Speaker Sir Peter Kenilorea South Africa National Assembly of South Africa Speaker Max Sisulu South Korea National Assembly of South Korea Speaker Park Hee-tae South Sudan National Legislative Assembly of South Sudan Speaker James Wani Igga Spain Congress of Deputies (Congreso de los Diputados) President Jesús Posada Moreno Sri Lanka Parliament of Sri Lanka Speaker Chamal Rajapaksa Suriname National Assembly of Suriname (De Nationale Assemblee) Chairman Jennifer Simons Sweden Parliament of Sweden (Riksdag) Speaker Per Westerberg Taiwan Legislative Yuan President Wang Jin-pyng Thailand House of Representatives of Thailand President Somsak Kiatsuranont Ukraine Verkhovna Rada Chairman Volodymyr Lytvyn United Kingdom House of Commons of the United Kingdom Speaker John Bercow  » Isle of Man House of Keys Speaker Steve Rodan  » Northern Ireland Northern Ireland Assembly Speaker William Hay  » Scotland Scottish Parliament Presiding Officer Tricia Marwick  » Wales National Assembly for Wales Presiding Officer Rosemary Butler United States United States House of Representatives Speaker John Boehner Uruguay Chamber of Deputies of Uruguay President Ivonne Passada Vanuatu Parliament of Vanuatu Speaker George Andre Wells Vietnam National Assembly of Vietnam Chairman Nguyen Sinh Hung Zimbabwe House of Assembly of Zimbabwe Speaker Lovemore Moyo [ See also ] Generic President of Congress (disambiguation) President of the Legislative Assembly (disambiguation) President of the National Assembly (disambiguation) President of the Senate Speaker of the House Speaker of the House of Assembly (disambiguation) Speaker of the House of Commons (disambiguation) Speaker of the House of Representatives (disambiguation) Speaker of the Legislative Assembly (disambiguation) Speaker of the National Assembly (disambiguation) Speaker of the Senate Specific Speaker of the Canadian Senate Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of Ontario Speaker of the Palestinian Legislative Council Cathaoirleach (Speaker of the Irish Senate ) Lord Speaker (Speaker of the United Kingdom House of Lords ) Marshal of the Senate, Poland President of the European Parliament President of the National Assembly of Quebec President of the Senate of Romania Presiding Officer of the United States Senate Historic Lawspeaker [ Literature ] Bergougnous, Georges. Presiding Officers of National Parliamentary Assemblies: A World Comparative Study. Trans. Jennifer Lorenzi. Geneva: Inter-Parliamentary Union, 1997. ISBN 92-9142-028-X. [ References ] Category:Parliamentary titles Category:Legislatures Category:Government occupations Category:Positions of authority Category:Legal professions af:Speaker‎ de:Parlamentspräsident eo:Parolanto (politiko) id:Kepala parlemen it:Presidente della Camera dei Deputati ja:議長 ru:Спикер sv:Talman uk:Спікер zh:議長