[ other men at some time in history called &quot; William I of Orange-Nassau &quot; William of Orange (disambiguation) ] [ September 2007 ] [ yes 1772 8 24 ] { The Hague } [ yes 1843 12 12 1772 8 24 ] { Berlin } { Nieuwe Kerk, } { Delft } { Dutch Reformed } Helmed coat-of-arms of King William I William I Frederick, born Willem Frederik Prins van Oranje-Nassau (24 August 1772 – 12 December 1843), was a Prince of Orange and the first King of the Netherlands and Grand Duke of Luxembourg. In Germany, he was ruler (as Fürst ) of the Principality of Nassau-Orange-Fulda from 1803 until 1806 and of the Principality of Orange-Nassau in the year 1806 and from 1813 till 1815. In 1813 he was named &apos;Sovereign Prince&apos; of the Netherlands, and proclaimed himself King of the Netherlands and Duke of Luxembourg on 16 March 1815. In the same year on 9 June William I became also the Grand Duke of Luxembourg and after 1839 he was furthermore the Duke of Limburg. After his abdication in 1840 he named himself King William Frederick, Count of Nassau. [ Biography ] King William I&apos;s parents were the last stadtholder William V, Prince of Orange and his wife Wilhelmina of Prussia. Until 1813, William was known as William VI, Prince of Nassau-Dietz, Prince of Orange. In Berlin on 1 October 1791, William married his first cousin (Frederica Louisa) Wilhelmina, born in Potsdam. She was the daughter of King Frederick William II of Prussia. After Wilhelmina died in 1837, William married Countess Henriette d&apos;Oultremont de Wégimont ( Maastricht, 28 February 1792 – Schloss Rahe, 26 October 1864), created Countess of Nassau, on 17 February 1841 in Berlin. This was a morganatic marriage. Two years later, William died. [ Exile ] [ Government of the Dutch Republic in exile ] William V was hereditary stadtholder when the Republic of the Seven United Provinces was invaded by the French Revolutionary armies in 1794. In January 1795 he fled with his son to England. Unlike his father, who gave his people permission to collaborate with the French [ January 2009 ], William was a strong personality and he tried to regain the Republic. In 1799, William landed in the current North Holland as part of an Anglo-Russian invasion. The local Dutch population was not pleased with the arrival of the prince. Some local Orangists were even executed. After several minor battles he was forced to leave the country again after the Convention of Alkmaar. Napoleon Bonaparte gave him some small German principalities as indemnities for the lost territories. These principalities were confiscated when Napoleon invaded Germany (1806) and William supported his Prussian relatives. He succeeded his father as prince of Orange later that year, after William V&apos;s death. [ Return ] After Napoleon&apos;s defeat at Leipzig (October, 1813), the French troops retreated to France. A provisional government was formed under the lead of some former Patriots who recalled William, in contrast to their 1785 rebellion. In their view, it was taken for granted that William would have to head any new regime, and it would be better in the long term for the Dutch to restore him themselves. The Dutch population was pleased with the departure of the French, who had ruined the Dutch economy, and this time welcomed the prince. After having been invited by the Driemanschap (Triumvirate) of 1813, on 30 November 1813 William disembarked HMS Warrior and landed at Scheveningen beach, only a few metres from the place where he had left the country with his father eighteen years previously, and on 6 December the provisional government offered him the title of King. William refused, instead proclaiming himself &quot; sovereign prince &quot;. He also wanted the rights of the people to be guaranteed by &quot; a wise constitution &quot;. The constitution offered William extensive (almost absolute) powers. Ministers were only responsible to him, while a two-chambered parliament ( the States-General ) exercised only limited power. He was inaugurated as sovereign prince in the New Church in Amsterdam. In 1814 he gained sovereignty over the whole of the Low Countries. [ King of the Netherlands ] Royal Monogram Feeling threatened by Napoleon, who had escaped from Elba, William proclaimed himself King of the United Kingdom of the Netherlands on 16 March 1815 at the urging of the powers gathered at the Congress of Vienna. His son, the future king William II, fought as a commander at the Battle of Waterloo. After Napoleon had been sent into exile, William adopted a new constitution which included much of the old constitution, such as extensive royal power s. He was the 876th Knight of the Order of the Golden Fleece in Spain and the 648th Knight of the Order of the Garter in 1814. [ Children ] With his wife Wilhelmina, King William I had six children: &apos;&apos;Willem&apos;&apos; Frederik George Lodewijk (b. The Hague, 6 December 1792 – d. Tilburg, 17 March 1849) later King William II of the Netherlands from 1840. Stillborn son (Hampton Court, Palace, Middlesex, 18 August 1795). Willem &apos;&apos;Frederik&apos;&apos; Karel (b. Berlin, 28 February 1797 – d. Wassenaar, 8 September 1881). Wilhelmina Frederika Louise &apos;&apos;Pauline&apos;&apos; Charlotte (b. Berlin, 1 March 1800 – d. Freienwalde, 22 December 1806). Stillborn son (Berlin, 30 August 1806). Wilhelmina Frederika Louise Charlotte &apos;&apos;Marianne&apos;&apos; (b. Berlin, 9 May 1810 – d. Schloss Reinhartshausen bei Erbach, 29 May 1883), married on 14 September 1830 with Prince Albert of Prussia. They divorced in 1849. [ Principal changes ] The States-General was divided into two chambers. The Eerste Kamer (First Chamber or Senate or House of Lords) was appointed by the King. The Tweede Kamer (Second Chamber or House of Representatives or House of Commons) was elected by the Provincial States, which were in turn chosen by census suffrage. The 110 seats were divided equally between the North and the South (modern-day Belgium), although the population of the North (2 million) was significantly less than that of the South (3.5 million). The States-General&apos;s primary function was to approve the King&apos;s laws and decrees. The constitution contained many present-day Dutch political institutions; however, their functions and composition have changed greatly over the years. The constitution was accepted in the North, but not in the South. The under-representation of the South was one of the causes of the Belgian Revolution. Referendum turnout was low, in the Southern provinces, but William interpreted all abstentions to be yes votes. He prepared a lavish inauguration for himself in Brussels, where he gave the people copper coins (leading to his first nickname, the Copper King). The spearhead of King William&apos;s policies was economic progress. As he founded many trade institutions, his second nickname was the King-Merchant. In 1822, he founded the Algemeene Nederlandsche Maatschappij ter Begunstiging van de Volksvlijt, which would become one of the most important institutions of Belgium after its independence. Industry flourished, especially in the South. In 1817, he also founded three universities in the Southern provinces, such as a new University of Leuven, the University of Ghent and the University of Liège. The Northern provinces, meanwhile, were the centre of trade. This, in combination with the colonies ( Dutch East Indies, Surinam, Curaçao and Dependencies, and the Dutch Gold Coast ) created great wealth for the Kingdom. However, the money flowed into the hands of Dutch directors. Only a few Belgians managed to profit from the economic growth. Feelings of economic inequity were another cause of the Belgian uprising. Officially, a separation of church and state existed in the kingdom. However, William himself was a strong supporter of the Reformed Church. This led to resentment among the people in the South, who were Roman Catholic. William had also devised controversial language and school policies. Dutch was imposed as the official language in (the Dutch-speaking region of) Flanders; this angered French -speaking aristocrats and industrial workers. Schools throughout the Kingdom were required to instruct students in the Reformed faith and the Dutch language. Many in the South feared that the King sought to exterminate Catholicism and the French language. [ Belgian uprising ] [ Belgian Revolution ] In August 1830 the opera La Muette de Portici, involving the repression of Neapolitan s, was staged in Brussels. Performances of this show seemed to crystallise a sense of nationalism and &quot; Hollandophobia &quot; in Brussels, and spread to the rest of the South. Rioting ensued, chiefly aimed at the kingdom&apos;s unpopular justice minister, who lived in Brussels. An infuriated William responded by sending troops to repress the riots. However, the riots had spread to other Southern cities. The riots quickly became popular uprisings. Soon an independent state of Belgium was proclaimed. The next year, William sent his sons to Belgium to repress this state. Although initially victorious, the Dutch army was forced to retreat after the threat of French intervention. Some support for the Orange dynasty (chiefly among Flemings ) persisted for years but the Dutch never regained control over Belgium. William nevertheless continued the war for eight years. His economic successes became overshadowed by a perceived mismanagement of the war effort. High costs of the war came to burden the Dutch economy, fueling public resentment. In 1839, William was forced to end the war. The United Kingdom of the Netherlands was dissolved and continued as the Kingdom of the Netherlands. It was not renamed, however, as the &quot; United &quot; -prefix had never been part of its name, but rather was retrospectively added by historians for descriptive purposes (cf. Weimar Republic ). [ Constitutional changes and abdication ] { Apeldoorn } Constitutional changes were initiated in 1840 because the terms which involved the United Kingdom of the Netherlands had to be removed. These constitutional changes also included the introduction of judicial ministerial responsibility. Although the policies remained uncontrolled by parliament, the prerogative was controllable now. The very conservative William could not live with these constitutional changes. This, the disappointment about the loss of Belgium and William&apos;s intention to marry Henrietta d&apos;Oultremont (scandalously both Belgian and Catholic ) created desires about abdication. He fulfilled his desires on 7 October 1840 and his eldest son acceded to the throne as king William II. William died in 1843 in Berlin at the age of 71. [ Ancestry ] [ Dutch monarchs family tree ] [ 1. William I of the Netherlands 2. William V, Prince of Orange 3. Wilhelmina of Prussia 4. William IV, Prince of Orange 5. Anne, Princess Royal 6. Prince Augustus William of Prussia 7. Louise Amalie of Brunswick-Lüneburg 8. John William Friso, Prince of Orange 9. Marie Louise of Hesse-Kassel 10. George II of Great Britain 11. Caroline of Brandenburg-Ansbach 12. Frederick William I of Prussia 13. Sophia Dorothea of Hanover 14. Ferdinand Albert II, Duke of Brunswick-Lüneburg 15. Antoinette Amalie of Brunswick-Wolfenbüttel 16. Henry Casimir II, Count of Nassau-Dietz 17. Henriëtte Amalia of Anhalt-Dessau 18. Charles I, Landgrave of Hesse-Kassel (or Hesse-Cassel) 19. Maria Amalia of Courland 20. George I of Great Britain 21. Sophia Dorothea of Celle 22. John Frederick, Margrave of Brandenburg-Ansbach 23. Princess Eleonore Erdmuthe of Saxe-Eisenach 24. Frederick I of Prussia 25. Sophia Charlotte of Hanover 26. George I of Great Britain (= 20) 27. Sophia Dorothea of Celle (= 21) 28. Ferdinand Albert I, Duke of Brunswick-Lüneburg 29. Christina Wilhelmina of Hesse-Eschwege 30. Louis Rudolph, Duke of Brunswick-Lüneburg 31. Princess Christine Louise of Oettingen-Oettingen 24. Frederick I of Prussia 25. Sophia Charlotte of Hanover 26. George I of Great Britain (= 20) 27. Sophia Dorothea of Celle (= 21) 28. Ferdinand Albert I, Duke of Brunswick-Lüneburg 29. Christina Wilhelmina of Hesse-Eschwege 30. Louis Rudolph, Duke of Brunswick-Lüneburg 31. Princess Christine Louise of Oettingen-Oettingen ] [ External links ] [ William I of the Netherlands ] King Willem I (1772–1843) at the Dutch Royal House website [ House of Orange-Nassau 25 August 1772 12 December 1843 ] [ nl ] [ nl ] [ William V ] [ Prince of Orange 1806–1815 ] [ William II ] [ creation ] [ Count of Nassau 1840–1843 ] [ Abolished ] [ creation due to German Mediatisation ] [ Prince of Nassau-Orange-Fulda 1803–1806 ] [ Confiscated due to creation Confederation of the Rhine ] [ William V ] [ Prince of Orange-Nassau 1806, 1813–1815 ] [ Abolished Incorporated into Nassau ] [ Louis II King of Holland ] [ Sovereign Prince of the Netherlands 1813–1815 ] [ Himself as King ] [ Himself Sovereign Prince ] [ King of the Netherlands 1815–1840 ] [ 3 William II ] [ Francis I Duke of Luxembourg ] [ Grand Duke of Luxembourg 1815–1840 ] [ Francis I Duke of Limburg ] [ Duke of Limburg 1839–1840 ] [ William 01 of the Netherlands Willem I der Nederlanden (Dutch) King of the Netherlands (1815–1840) 24 August 1772 The Hague 12 December 1843 Berlin ] Category:Princes of Orange Category:Dutch monarchs Category:Grand Dukes of Luxembourg Category:Dukes of Limburg Category:Protestant monarchs Category:House of Orange-Nassau Category:Knights of the Garter Category:Knights of the Golden Fleece Category:Honorary Knights Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath Category:People of the Belgian Revolution Category:1772 births Category:1843 deaths Category:Recipients of the Order of St. George of the Fourth Degree Category:Burials in the Royal Crypt at Nieuwe Kerk, Delft Category:Grand Masters of the Military William Order Category:Grand Masters of the Order of the Netherlands Lion Category:Monarchs who abdicated be:Вілем I br:Willem Iañ an Izelvroioù ca:Guillem I dels Països Baixos cs:Vilém I. Nizozemský da:Vilhelm 1. af Nederlandene de:Wilhelm I. (Niederlande) es:Guillermo I de los Países Bajos eo:Vilhelmo la 1-a (Nederlando) fr:Guillaume Ier des Pays-Bas fy:Willem I ko:빌럼 1세 it:Guglielmo I dei Paesi Bassi la:Gulielmus I (rex Nederlandiae) lb:Wëllem I. vun Holland mr:विल्यम पहिला, नेदरलँड्स nl:Willem I der Nederlanden ja:ウィレム1世 (オランダ王) no:Vilhelm I av Nederland nn:Vilhelm I av Nederland pl:Wilhelm I (król Niderlandów) pt:Guilherme I dos Países Baixos ro:Willem I al Țărilor de Jos ru:Виллем I fi:Vilhelm I (Alankomaat) sv:Vilhelm I av Nederländerna tr:I. Willem uk:Віллем I wa:Wiyåme 1î d&apos; Orandje vls:Willem I van de Nederlandn