[ Yangshuo County County Chinese Simplified 阳朔县 Traditional 陽朔縣 Pinyin Yángshuò Xiàn yangshuoFromTvTower.jpg 250px The town of Yangshuo from a nearby karst peak. The Li River can be seen in the background. China Location in China inline,title CN Country China Region Guangxi Prefecture Guilin County seat Yangshuo Town 1428 300000 auto China Standard +8 24 47 N 110 30 E http://www.yangshuo.gov.cn/ ] Yangshuo County ( [ 阳朔县 陽朔縣 Yángshuò Xiàn ] ) is a county in Guilin, Guangxi Province, China. Its seat is located in Yangshuo Town. Surrounded by karst peaks and bordered on one side by the Li River (漓江) it is easily accessible by bus or by boat from nearby Guilin. Over the years, it has become popular with foreign backpackers. [ Layout ] The town borders the Li River on one side, and is situated on a small plain between a number of karst peaks. Two main roads run away from the water and form the central part of the town, Chinese Street (Die Cui Lu) and West Street (西街, Xi Jie). Most foreign-oriented businesses, such as hostel s, hotel s, rock climbing companies, restaurants and entertainment venues, are situated on West Street or the pedestrian only Xian Qian Street which runs between Chinese and West Street. [ Activities ] [ section April 2010 ] { Lijiang River } Visitors to Yangshuo can swim in the Li River or the cleaner Yu Long 遇龙河 (Dragon River), climb one of many nearby karst peaks, hire a bicycle for a cycling trip through the karst scenery, arrange a sightseeing trip on the Li River by bamboo raft or cruise boat, or visit a number of local cave systems, including a butterfly cave. Zhang Yimou &apos;s folk musical, &quot; Impression Liu Sanjie &quot;, is a popular extravaganza performed outdoors in a river and mountain setting with a cast of 600 singers and dancers. Yangshuo is also China&apos;s foremost venue for rock climbing, with around 300 bolted routes and several companies offering guiding and equipment hire. Much of the town&apos;s traditional culture has been absorbed into the tourist industry, and tourists can pay a fee to watch fishermen fishing with cormorants, hire local women in traditional ethnic dress to pose for photographs, or take classes in Chinese calligraphy, tea ceremony, or cooking. [ Rock climbing ] { Moon Hill } The town of Yangshuo Rock climbing in Yangshuo was first put on the map by American climber Todd Skinner who visited in 1992, establishing a number of classic lines such as &quot; Moonwalker &quot; which traverses the famous Moon Hill arch. Much of recent climbing history was influenced by the 2001 establishment of the now defunct Australia n owned company Chinaclimb (re-established in 2011 as Insight Adventures ). Other companies that have contributed include Karstclimber, Spiderman Climbing, Terratribes, and X-Climber. Approximately 200 routes are documented in the current edition of the Paul Collis Yangshuo climbing guidebook, and new routes are being established almost daily. The majority of these have been established by visiting foreign climbers or expatriates. While most routes are single- pitch bolted sport climbing routes, a growing number of multi-pitch sport routes are appearing as climbers venture above the first anchor. There is also great potential for traditional climbing. The Yangshuo region has numerous locations for climbing, most easily accessible by bicycle, public bus or taxi-van. The most famous of these crags is Moon Hill with several 5.13 graded lines, first climbed by American Todd Skinner in 1992. Other crags of note include Low Mountain, Twin Gates, Baby Frog, The Egg, Bamboo Grove and Wine Bottle Cliff. [ Landmarks ] 20 Yuan note and its inspiration 20 Yuan note Li River Moon Hill Yulong River [ Sister cities ] Yangshuo has city partnerships with the following cities and/or regions: [ USA ] [ USA ] Since 1994: Morehead, Kentucky, United States Rapid City, South Dakota, United States [ Miscellaneous ] The picture on the back of the 20 yuan bill is taken at the Li River near Yangshuo. A digitised photo of the distinctive scenery of Yangshuo was used in the landmark 1993 video game, Doom as one of the backgrounds. [ External links ] [ Yangshuo ] Official website of Yangshuo County Guilin Tourism Organization Photo Gallery of Guilin, Li River, Yangshuo Town, and Longsheng Terraced Rice Field WinWin Travels Yangshuo Category:Guilin de:Yangshuo es:Yangshuo fr:Xian de Yangshuo hak:Yòng-suk-yen ko:양숴 현 nl:Yangshuo ja:陽朔県 no:Yangshuo vi:Dương Sóc zh:阳朔县