[ FMNH the Florida Museum of Natural History FLMNH ] [ 2007a ] The Field Museum of Natural History (abbreviated FMNH) is located in Chicago, Illinois, USA. It sits on Lake Shore Drive next to Lake Michigan, part of a scenic complex known as the Museum Campus Chicago. The museum collections contain over 21 million specimens, [ http://www.scienceblog.com/community/older/2001/A/200110158.html Scienceblog ] of which only a small portion are ever on display. The president of the museum is Richard W. Lariviere. [ Field Museum Names Richard Lariviere as Next President http://fieldmuseum.org/about/field-museum-names-richard-lariviere-new-president The Field Museum 24 April 2012 ] Some prized exhibits in the Field Museum include a large collection of dinosaur skeletons in the Evolving Planet exhibit, a comprehensive set of human cultural anthropology exhibits (with artifacts from ancient Egypt, the Pacific Northwest, the Pacific Islands, and Tibet), a large and diverse taxidermy collection (with many large animals, including two prized African elephants and the infamous Lions of Tsavo featured in the 1996 movie The Ghost and the Darkness ), the Ancient Americas exhibit devoted to a large collection of Native American artifacts, and Sue (the largest and most complete Tyrannosaurus skeleton currently known). [ History ] The Field Museum was incorporated in the State of Illinois on September 16, 1893 as the Columbian Museum of Chicago with its purpose the &quot; accumulation and dissemination of knowledge, and the preservation and exhibition of artifacts illustrating art, archaeology, science and history. &quot; The museum was originally housed in the World&apos;s Columbian Exposition &apos;s Palace of Fine Arts (which is today home to the Museum of Science and Industry ). In 1905, the museum&apos;s name was changed to Field Museum of Natural History to honor the museum&apos;s first major benefactor, Marshall Field, and to better reflect its focus on natural history. In 1921, the museum moved from its original location to its present site on Chicago Park District property near downtown, where it is part of the lakefront Museum Campus that includes the John G. Shedd Aquarium and the Adler Planetarium. In 2006, the Field Museum was the number one cultural attraction in Chicago but surrendered the title in 2007 to the Shedd Aquarium. [ Crain&apos;s List Largest Tourist Attractions (Cultural): Ranked by 2007 attendance 2008-06-23 22 Crain Communications Inc. Crain&apos;s Chicago Business ] Main Hall [ Permanent exhibitions ] There are many permanent exhibits located at the Field Museum for the public to enjoy: Animal exhibits and dioramas such as Nature Walk, Mammals of Asia, and Mammals of Africa that allow visitors an up-close look at the diverse habitats that animals inhabit. Most notably featured are the infamous Lions of Tsavo featured in the 1996 movie The Ghost and the Darkness The Grainger Hall of Gems and its large collection of diamonds and gems from around the world, and also includes a Louis Comfort Tiffany stained glass window. The Hall of Jades focuses on Chinese jade artifacts spanning 8,000 years. The Underground Adventure gives visitors a bugs-eye look at the world beneath their feet. Visitors can see what insects and soil look like from that size, while learning about the biodiversity of soil and the importance of healthy soil. { seafloor spreading and } { continental drift illustrated on relief globe of the museum } [ 1600 sqft m2 on ] DNA Discovery Center: Visitors can watch real scientists extract DNA from a variety of organisms. Museum goers can also speak to a live scientist through the glass everyday and ask them any questions about DNA. McDonald&apos;s Fossil Prep Lab: The public can watch as paleontologists prepare real fossils for study. The Regenstein Laboratory: conservation and collections facility. Visitors can watch as conservators work to preserve and study anthropological specimens from all over the world. Other exhibits include sections on Tibet and China, where visitors can view traditional clothing. There is also an exhibit on life in Africa, where visitors can learn about the many different cultures on the continent and an exhibit where visitors may &quot; visit &quot; several Pacific Islands. The museum houses an authentic 19th century Māori Meeting House, Ruatepupuke II, { &quot; A Marae Abroad &quot;, Gisbourne Herald } from Tokomaru Bay, New Zealand. There are also a few vintage Mold-A-Rama machines that create injection-molded plastic dinosaurs collected by Chicago children. [ Sue the Tyrannosaurus rex ] [ Sue (dinosaur) ] { Tyrannosaurus rex &apos;&apos; skeleton currently known. } On May 17, 2000, the Field Museum unveiled Sue, the most complete and best-preserved Tyrannosaurus rex fossil yet discovered. Sue is 42 feet (13 m) long, stands 13 feet (4 m) high at the hips and is 67 million years old. The fossil was named after Sue Hendrickson, the paleontologist who found it, and is commonly referred to as female, though the fossil&apos;s actual gender is unknown. { Sue statistics from the Field Museum } Sue&apos;s body is located on the main floor in the Stanley Field Hall and her juvenile counterpart, Jane. Her skull is located in a case on the second floor balcony above her skeleton because it was too heavy to be mounted on the rest of the body (a replica is instead mounted on Sue&apos;s body). From the rings in the bones, Sue was estimated to be about 29 years of age at the time of her death. [ Library ] The library at the Field Museum was organized in 1893 to meet the research needs of the museum&apos;s scientific staff, visiting researchers, students, and members of the general public interested in natural history and are an essential resource for the Museum’s research, exhibition development and educational programs. The 275,000 volumes of the Main Research Collections concentrate on biological systematics, environmental and evolutionary biology, anthropology, botany, geology, archaeology, museology and related subjects. Some highlights of the Field Museum Library include: Ayer Collection: The private, chiefly ornithological, collection of Edward E. Ayer, the first president of the museum. The collection contains virtually all the important works in history of ornithology and is especially rich in color-illustrated works. Laufer Collection: The working collection of Dr. Berthold Laufer, America’s first sinologist and Curator of Anthropology until his death in 1934. The Library houses approximately 7,000 volumes in Chinese, Japanese, Tibetan, and numerous Western languages on anthropology, archaeology, religion, science, and travel. Photo Archives: A compilation of over 250,000 images in the areas of anthropology, botany, geology, and zoology. The collection also documents the history and architecture of the museum, its exhibitions, staff and scientific expeditions. Two important collections from the Photo Archives are now available via the Illinois Digital Archives (IDA): World&apos;s Columbian Exposition of 1893 from The Field Museum and Urban Landscapes from The Field Museum. In April 2009, the Photo Archives became part of the Flickr Commons. [ Research and education ] As an educational institution, the Field Museum offers multiple opportunities for both informal and more structured public learning. Exhibits remain the primary means of informal education, but throughout its history the Museum has supplemented this approach with innovative educational programs. The Harris Loan Program, for example, begun in 1912, provides educational outreach to children, offering artifacts, specimens, audiovisual materials, and activity kits to Chicago area schools. The Department of Education, begun in 1922, offers a challenging program of classes, lectures, field trips, museum overnights and special events for families, adults and children. Professional symposia and lectures, such as the annual A. Watson Armour III Spring Symposium, present the latest scientific results to the international scientific community as well as the public at large. The Museum&apos;s curatorial and scientific staff in the departments of Anthropology, Botany, Geology, and Zoology conducts basic research in the fields of systematic biology and anthropology, and also has responsibility for collections management, and collaboration in public programs with the Departments of Education and Exhibits. Since its founding the Field Museum has been an international leader in evolutionary biology and paleontology, and archaeology and ethnography, and has long maintained close links, including joint teaching, students, seminars, with local universities—particularly the University of Chicago and the University of Illinois at Chicago [ Fieldiana ] The Museum publishes four peer-reviewed monograph series issued under the collective title Fieldiana, devoted to anthropology, botany, geology and zoology. [ http://www.fieldmuseum.org/research_collections/fieldiana/ Fieldiana 2008-01-26 Field Museum ] Monographs in these series are accessible via the Internet Archive. [ http://www.archive.org Internet Archive ] [ In popular media ] The Field Museum of Natural History served as the setting in the 1997 horror film &apos;&apos;The Relic&apos;&apos;. Many parts of the film, though, were created with computer graphics or with sets that bear only a passing similarity to the actual museum. It was used in several scenes for the Kevin Bacon movie She&apos;s Having a Baby. A chase scene in the 1996 Keanu Reeves thriller Chain Reaction combined the Field Museum and the Museum of Science and Industry, located several miles to the south, into one museum. [ Gallery ] Field Museum – Aerial View North Entrance Recreated Elephant Diorama Sue McDonald&apos;s Fossil Prep Lab Animated display of ocean life during the Cambrian Period Lifesize display of a forest from the Carboniferous Period Recreation of Papeete street in Traveling the Pacific Northern facade of The Field Museum Parasaurolophus skeleton Stegosaurus skeleton Daspletosaurus skeleton Skull of Parasaurolophus Skull of Masiakasaurus Skeletons of Buitreraptor and Deinonychus Skeleton of Buitreraptor Skeleton of Deinonychus Skeleton of Rapetosaurus Skull of Rapetosaurus Skeleton of Giant Beaver Skull of Daspletosaurus Lyuba ( mammoth calf ) Skeleton of Mamenchisaurus The Tsavo Maneaters on display Deinonychus skeleton Front view of Daspletosaurus Rearing Mamenchisaurus Skeleton of Brachiosaurus Skeleton of Daspletosaurus [ See also ] [ Chicago ] List of museums and cultural institutions in Chicago Captain Marshall Field Expeditions [ References ] [ External links ] [ Field Museum ] The Field Museum Category:Museums established in 1905 Category:Institutions accredited by the American Association of Museums Category:Museums in Chicago, Illinois Category:National Register of Historic Places in Chicago, Illinois Category:Greek Revival architecture in Illinois Category:Natural history museums in Illinois Category:Dinosaur museums in the United States Category:Visitor attractions in Chicago, Illinois Category:Marshall Field&apos;s Category:Pre-Columbian art museums in the United States Category:Egyptological collections in the United States ar:المتحف الميداني للتاريخ الطبيعي ca:Museu Field d&apos;Història Natural de:Field Museum of Natural History es:Museo Field de Historia Natural fr:Muséum Field it:Field Museum la:Museum Historiae Naturalis Field nl:Field Museum of Natural History ja:フィールド自然史博物館 no:Field Museum of Natural History oc:Field Museum d&apos;Istòria Naturala pl:Muzeum Historii Naturalnej w Chicago pt:Museu Field de História Natural ru:Филдовский музей естественной истории sv:Field Museum zh:菲爾德自然史博物館