[ November 2010 ] [ Wetten, dass..? Image:Wetten dass logo.png Wetten, dass..? logo Game show Frank Elstner Markus Lanz (2012-) Thomas Gottschalk (1987 –1992, 1993-2011) Michelle Hunziker (2009-2011, co-moderation) Wolfgang Lippert (1992 –1993) Frank Elstner (1981 –1987) Germany Austria Switzerland Italy German approx. 150 min. ZDF, ORF, SF DRS, Rai Sender Bozen 14 February 1981 present Wedden, dat..? (Netherlands) Wanna Bet? (U.S.) You Bet! (UK) Scommettiamo che...? (Italy) http://www.wetten-dass.com/ ] Wetten, dass..? ( German for &quot; Wanna bet that..? &quot; ) is a long-running German-language entertainment television show. It is the most successful Saturday television show in Europe. { &quot; Quotenmeter.de &quot; } Its format was the basis for the British show You Bet! and the American show Wanna Bet?. The shows are broadcast live six to seven times a year from different cities in Germany, Austria, and Switzerland. There have also been seven open-air summer shows, broadcast from Amphitheatre Xanten, Plaça de Toros de Palma de Mallorca, Disneyland Paris, Waldbühne Berlin, and Aspendos Roman Theatre. Each of the shows, which are shown without commercial interruption, are usually scheduled to last for about two hours, but it is not uncommon for a show to run as much as 45 minutes longer. [ History ] On 14 February 1981, the German channel ZDF broadcast the first episode in cooperation with the Austria n broadcaster ORF and the Swiss channel SF DRS. The inventor of the show, Frank Elstner, hosted the show until its 39th episode in 1987. Wetten, dass..? has since been hosted by entertainer Thomas Gottschalk, except during a brief interval from 1992 to 1993, when nine episodes were presented by Wolfgang Lippert. Gottschalk hosted his 100th episode of the show on 27 March 2004. In summer 2007, &quot; Wetten, dass..? &quot; had its first show in 16:9 widescreen. Since late 2009, Michelle Hunziker has assisted Gottschalk in hosting the show. The show on 27 February 2010 was the first show broadcast in HD. Thomas Gottschalk left the show on 3 December 2011, the end of the 2011 season, because of an accident involving Samuel Koch, a 23-year old man who became a quadriplegic due to a stunt which he performed on the show of 4 December 2010. After long speculations who would take over the show, ZDF announced on 11 March 2012 that Markus Lanz will be next presenter. His first show will be on 6 October 2012. [ Markus Lanz übernimmt &quot; Wetten, dass..? &quot; http://www.zdf.de/ZDF/zdfportal/web/ZDF.de/Wetten-dass../2942576/5411264/3847af/Markus-Lanz-uebernimmt-Wetten-dass...html?mediaType%3DArtikel Meldung auf ZDFheute 2 May 2012 German ] [ Concept ] The core gimmick of the show is the bet s : ordinary people offer to perform some unusual (often bizarre) and very difficult task. Some examples, all of which were performed successfully, include: Lighting a pocket lighter using an excavator &apos;s shovel (19 February 1983). Assembling a V8 engine from parts and make it run within 9 minutes (2 November 1991) 13 swimmers towing a 312 tonne ship over a distance of 25 meters (7 October 1995) Recognising 5 of 6 (out of a total of 75) species of birds blindfolded by feeling a single feather (9 November 2002). A Chinese martial artist pushing a car with a spear, the tip of which was resting on his throat A nine-year-old boy from Vienna computing the shortest bus and railcar routes throughout the city from memory A blindfolded farmer recognizing his cows by the sound they made while chewing apples The other major attraction of the show is the top-ranking celebrity guests, with considerable screen time given to the host greeting and chatting with them. Each of the guests must bet on the outcome of one of the performances and offer a wager, in recent years usually a humour ous or mildly humiliating, originally more charitable, activity to be carried out if they lose. Until 1987, each of the celebrities bet on all the performances and the most accurate one was selected to be that show&apos;s Wettkönig ( &quot; bet king &quot; ). Ever since, one of the people performing the task is selected by a telephone vote. Celebrities that have appeared on the show include a vast range of personalities, with repeated guests including the likes of Jennifer Lopez, Tom Cruise, Angelina Jolie, Cameron Diaz, Brad Pitt, Naomi Campbell, Michael Douglas, Michael Jackson, Jennifer Aniston, David Beckham, Hugh Grant, Arnold Schwarzenegger, Claudia Schiffer, Heidi Klum, Bill Gates, Karl Lagerfeld, Mikhail Gorbachev and Gerhard Schröder. Additionally, until 2001, members of the audience could offer bets against the host to find a certain number of unusual persons (e.g. 10 ladies over the age of 65 driving motorbikes). One of these was selected at the beginning of the show and had to be fulfilled by its end. Since 2001, the host bets against the entire city where the show is held. Between the bets and the celebrity smalltalk, there are musical performances by top-ranking artists like Coldplay, Kiss, t.A.T.u., Whitney Houston, Katy Perry, Michael Jackson, Madonna, Aerosmith, Bryan Adams, Shakira, Britney Spears, Scorpions, Bon Jovi, Meat Loaf, Elton John, Tokio Hotel, Miley Cyrus, Ashley Tisdale, Joe Cocker, Lady Gaga, Luciano Pavarotti, Celine Dion, Christina Aguilera, Mariah Carey, Robert Plant, Status Quo, Leona Lewis, David Bowie, Cher and Tina Turner. [ International versions ] In the Netherlands, a version was broadcast between 1984 and 1999 under the name Wedden, dat..? by the AVRO and (from the early nineties) RTL 4. The Dutch shows were hosted by Jos Brink until 1993, after which Rolf Wouters took over. Reinout Oerlemans presented the show for one season in 1999. Wetten, dass..? inspired the British series You Bet!. It was produced by London Weekend Television and was broadcast on ITV from 1988 to 1997. The hosts were Bruce Forsyth (1988 –1990), Matthew Kelly (1991 –1995), and Darren Day (1996 –1997). In October 2004, Wetten, dass..? also started in the Chinese television under the title Wanna Challenge (as gambling is illegal in China). It is shown once a week and reaches 60 million viewers each episode. In early 2000s, a Slovenia n version of Wetten, dass..? started weekly on POP TV under the title Super Pop hosted by Stojan Auer. There were initiations of close production connections with the original Wetten, dass..?, but the show was canceled because of high production costs before any further common productions were made. The show was also broadcast with great success in Italy by Rai 1 from 1991 to 1996 (and then in 1999, 2001, and 2003) with the title Scommettiamo che...?. In 2008 it was taken up again by Rai 2. In 2005 and 2006, a Polish version was broadcast under the name Załóż się. In 2006, ABC signed with reality producer Phil Gurin of The Gurin Company to develop an American version of the show. Six episodes were broadcast in July–September 2008, hosted by British duo Ant &amp; Dec. { Howdy there, Geordie lads! } This is not the first time the show has been produced for American audiences; in 1993, CBS broadcast a pilot called Wanna Bet?, hosted by Mark McEwen, which was not picked up as a full series. Wetten, dass..? also had a Spanish version which run on Spain&apos;s National broadcaster TVE 1 between 4 May 1993 and 30 June 2000. The programme titled Que Apostamos was fronted by the popular Ramon Garcia and Ana Obregon. The Spanish &quot; commonwealth &quot; of regional TV stations operating under the FORTA umbrella later recovered the format in 2008, but the revival was short lived and was swiftly axed due to low ratings and the high cost of producing the programme. There are also plans to show Wetten, dass..? in India, Northern Africa, and the Middle East. { &quot; Quotenmeter.de &quot; } [ Additional information ] [ Gottschalk retires from “Wetten Dass” after accident with Samuel Koch http://dailyherold.tv/2011/02/12/gottschalk-leaves-wetten-dass-after-accident-with-samuel-koch/ The Daily Herold – DailyHerold.tv 2 May 2012 12 February 2011 ] There was an instance where Frank Elstner lost a private bet himself; he had bet with his family that his colleague Kurt Felix would never fool him. (Kurt Felix ran a show similar to Candid Camera, called Verstehen Sie Spaß? ( &quot; Can You Take a Joke? &quot; ). On the 29th show (21 September 1985), after an outdoor challenge which involved painting the ZDF logo onto the roof of a car with a paintbrush fixed to a helicopter&apos;s skid, the pilot was invited along with the guests for a drink of champagne. But the contents of the bottle turned out to be pure vinegar, as Elstner discovered when he was the first to take a sample, and the red-haired and bearded pilot revealed himself to the laughing audience as Kurt Felix in disguise. In a special on German TV, Elstner said, Wetten, dass..? had the chance to have Pope John Paul II on the show, but only via video link, not direct in person. Elstner refused, because this could be precedent for future celebrities and famous people to come on the show via video link and not appear in person on the set. Elstner regretted the once-in-a-lifetime chance to have the pope on his show and said it was the greatest mistake of his career. In the 25th show on 15 December 1984, environmental activists ran in front of the cameras with a banner that read &quot; Nicht wetten Donauauen retten &quot; ( &quot; Don&apos;t bet save the Danube wetlands &quot; ). When they were pulled out of the way by the show&apos;s security, Frank Elstner commanded that no one was to be thrown out of his show. He let the activists make their request and they left the show peacefully. The banner was for the then Austrian chancellor Fred Sinowatz, who was a guest on that show. In the 48th show on 3 September 1988, an editor of the German satirical magazine Titanic, Bernd Fritz, sneaked into the show as a contestant under the pseudonym Thomas Rautenberg. The real Thomas Rautenberg, a graphic artist from Munich, offered his bet to Wetten, dass..?, to see how the ZDF would react. He claimed to recognize the color of crayons by tasting them. Bernd Fritz took the bet to the show and won the bet. However he admitted he was cheating and the solution of how he did it could be read in the next issue of Titanic. Gottschalk then told the audience that he would read the magazine, and tell the trick in the next show, so that the magazine wouldn&apos;t get the publicity from this stunt. It was later explained that the blacked ski goggles that contestants wear if they need their vision removed for the bet, were adjusted by Fritz so he could peek through a gap along his nose to see the color of the crayon. The showmaster tested the visibility through the goggles by faking punches against Fritz eyes and seeing if he would try to dodge them, but after the test it seemed as if Fritz adjusted the goggles to a more comfortable position before he attempted the bet. Since then, swimming goggles with a rubber sealing that sticks to the skin have been used. In the 102nd show on 8 December 1996, a live bet at the Russian space station Mir was planned. The cosmonauts wanted to decorate a Christmas tree in zero gravity in two minutes. Because of technical problems, however, the station couldn&apos;t be contacted during the show. Samuel Koch, a 23-year old man became a quadriplegic during a stunt performed on the show on December 4, 2010. The incident was broadcast live. The contestant was attempting to launch a career as a stunt man. He took on a bet in which he was to try to jump over five moving cars using spring-loaded boot s. The cars were of gradually increasing length. While the first three attempts were successful, the stunt went horribly wrong during the fourth try, when the man failed to clear the car. His head hit the windshield while he was inverted, and he then landed awkwardly on the studio floor, taking the impact on his head. Peer Schader, &quot; Unfall bei Wetten, dass: Ein Sturz, ein Schock und viele Fragen &quot; ZDF Heute.de magazin. (December 4, 2010) Retrieved December 4, 2010 &quot; Contestant Samuel Koch &quot; Yahoo News. (December 4, 2010) Retrieved December 4, 2010 &quot; Warten auf ein Wunder &quot; The contestant fractured two cervical vertebrae and damaged his spinal cord. He was transported to a nearby hospital, where doctors performed emergency surgery. He is alive but is now a permanent quadriplegic. The episode was interrupted and subsequently prematurely terminated, a first in the program&apos;s history. ZDF has stated that the episode and the relevant segment of the show will never be rebroadcast. Host Thomas Gottschalk announced soon after the stunt that he would be leaving the show at the end of the 2011 season, and that his departure was mainly over the accident. [ Notes ] [ See also ] Wanna Bet? You Bet! Wedden Dat? [ External links ] [ http://wettendass.zdf.de/ ] [ http://www.wetten-dass.com/ ] [ 0081961 &quot; Wetten, dass..? &quot; ] Article: Thomas Gottschalk announces departure from &quot; Wetten, dass &quot; to (german) Category:1981 television series debuts Category:German game shows Category:ZDF television series da:Wetten, dass..? de:Wetten, dass..? es:Wetten, dass..? fr:Wetten, dass..? nl:Wetten, dass..? pt:Wetten, dass..? zh:想挑战吗？