[ Electric transmission vehicle transmissions diesel-electric transmission ] 400  kV high-voltage transmission line near Madrid, Spain Electric-power transmission is the bulk transfer of electrical energy, from generating power plant s to electrical substation s located near demand centers. This is distinct from the local wiring between high-voltage substations and customers, which is typically referred to as electric power distribution.Transmission lines, when interconnected with each other, become transmission networks. In the US, these are typically referred to as &quot; power grids &quot; or just &quot; the grid. &quot; In the UK, the network is known as the &quot; National Grid. &quot; North America has three major grids, the Western Interconnection, the Eastern Interconnection and the Electric Reliability Council of Texas (ERCOT) grid. Historically, transmission and distribution lines were owned by the same company, but starting in the 1990s, many countries have liberalized the regulation of the electricity market in ways that have led to the separation of the electricity transmission business from the distribution business. [ http://www1.eere.energy.gov/femp/pdfs/primer.pdf A Primer on Electric Utilities, Deregulation, and Restructuring of U.S. Electricity Markets United States Department of Energy Federal Energy Management Program (FEMP) 2002-05 pdf December 27, 2008 ] Most transmission lines use high-voltage three-phase alternating current (AC), although single phase AC is sometimes used in railway electrification system s. High-voltage direct-current (HVDC) technology is used for greater efficiency in very long distances (typically hundreds of miles (kilometres), or in submarine power cable s (typically longer than 30 miles (50  km). HVDC links are also used to stabilize against control problems in large power distribution networks where sudden new loads or blackouts in one part of a network can otherwise result in synchronization problems and cascading failure s. Electricity is transmitted at high voltage s (110  kV or above) to reduce the energy lost in long-distance transmission. Power is usually transmitted through overhead power line s. Underground power transmission has a significantly higher cost and greater operational limitations but is sometimes used in urban areas or sensitive locations. A key limitation in the distribution of electricity is, with minor exceptions, electrical energy cannot be stored, and therefore must be generated as needed. A sophisticated control system is required to ensure electric generation very closely matches the demand. If the demand for power exceeds the supply, generation plants and transmission equipment can shut down which, in the worst cases, can lead to a major regional blackout, such as occurred in the US Northeast blackouts of 1965, 1977, 2003, and in 1996 and 2011. To reduce the risk of such failures, electric transmission networks are interconnected into regional, national or continental wide networks thereby providing multiple redundant alternative routes for power to flow should (weather or equipment) failures occur. Much analysis is done by transmission companies to determine the maximum reliable capacity of each line (ordinarily less than its physical or thermal limit) to ensure spare capacity is available should there be any such failure in another part of the network. Diagram of an electrical system. [ Overhead transmission ] [ Overhead power line ] Contiguous United States power transmission grid consists of 300,000  km of lines operated by 500 companies. High-voltage overhead conductors are not covered by insulation. The conductor material is nearly always an aluminium alloy, made into several strands and possibly reinforced with steel strands. Copper was sometimes used for overhead transmission but aluminium is lighter, yields only marginally reduced performance, and costs much less. Overhead conductors are a commodity supplied by several companies worldwide. Improved conductor material and shapes are regularly used to allow increased capacity and modernize transmission circuits. Conductor sizes range from 12  mm 2 (#6 American wire gauge ) to 750  mm 2 (1,590,000 circular mils area), with varying resistance and current-carrying capacity. Thicker wires would lead to a relatively small increase in capacity due to the skin effect, that causes most of the current to flow close to the surface of the wire. Because of this current limitation, multiple parallel cables (called bundle conductor s ) are used when higher capacity is needed. Bundle conductors are also used at high voltages to reduce energy loss caused by corona discharge. 3-phase high voltage lines in Washington State Today, transmission-level voltages are usually considered to be 110  kV and above. Lower voltages such as 66  kV and 33  kV are usually considered subtransmission voltages but are occasionally used on long lines with light loads. Voltages less than 33  kV are usually used for distribution. Voltages above 230  kV are considered extra high voltage and require different designs compared to equipment used at lower voltages. Since overhead transmission wires depend on air for insulation, design of these lines requires minimum clearances to be observed to maintain safety. Adverse weather conditions of high wind and low temperatures can lead to power outages. Wind speeds as low as [ 23 kn km/h ] can permit conductors to encroach operating clearances, resulting in a flashover and loss of supply. { Hans Dieter Betz, Ulrich Schumann, Pierre Laroche (2009). Lightning: Principles, Instruments and Applications. Springer, pp. 202–203. ISBN 978-1-4020-9078-3. Retrieved on May 13, 2009. } Oscillatory motion of the physical line can be termed gallop or flutter depending on the frequency and amplitude of oscillation. [ Underground transmission ] [ Undergrounding ] Electric power can also be transmitted by underground power cables instead of overhead power lines. Underground cables take up less right-of-way than overhead lines, have lower visibility, and are less affected by bad weather. However, costs of insulated cable and excavation are much higher than overhead construction. Faults in buried transmission lines take longer to locate and repair. Underground lines are strictly limited by their thermal capacity, which permits less overload or re-rating than overhead lines. Long underground cables have significant capacitance, which may reduce their ability to provide useful power to loads. [ History ] [ History of electric power transmission ] New York City streets in 1890. Besides telegraph lines, multiple electric lines were required for each class of device requiring different voltages. In the early days of commercial electric power, transmission of electric power at the same voltage as used by lighting and mechanical loads restricted the distance between generating plant and consumers. In 1882, generation was with direct current (DC), which could not easily be increased in voltage for long-distance transmission. Different classes of loads (for example, lighting, fixed motors, and traction/railway systems) required different voltages, and so used different generators and circuits. [ March 2011 ] Due to this specialization of lines and because transmission was inefficient for low-voltage high-current circuits, generators needed to be near their loads. It seemed at the time, that the industry would develop into what is now known as a distributed generation system with large numbers of small generators located near their loads. [ http://www.oe.energy.gov/DocumentsandMedia/primer.pdf Electricity Transmission: A primer National Council on Electricity Policy pdf ] In 1886, in Great Barrington, Massachusetts, a 1   kV alternating current (AC) distribution system was installed. That same year, AC power at 2  kV, transmitted 30  km, was installed at Cerchi, Italy. At an AIEE meeting on May 16, 1888, Nikola Tesla delivered a lecture entitled A New System of Alternating Current Motors and Transformers, describing the equipment which allowed efficient generation and use of polyphase alternating current s. The transformer, and Tesla&apos;s polyphase and single-phase induction motors, were essential for a combined AC distribution system for both lighting and machinery. Ownership of the rights to the Tesla patents was a key advantage to the Westinghouse Company in offering a complete alternating current power system for both lighting and power. { Nikola Tesla &apos;s Alternating current } { polyphase generators on display at the 1893 } { World&apos;s Fair in Chicago. Tesla&apos;s polyphase innovations revolutionized transmission. } { Regarded } as one of the most influential electrical innovations, the universal system used transformer s to step-up voltage from generators to high-voltage transmission lines, and then to step-down voltage to local distribution circuits or industrial customers. [ http://books.google.com/?id%3Dg07Q9M4agp4C%26amp%3Bpg%3DPA122%26amp%3Blpg%3DPA122%26amp%3Bdq%3Dwestinghouse%2B%22universal%2Bsystem%22 119–122 Thomas P. Hughes Networks of Power: Electrification in Western Society, 1880–1930 Johns Hopkins University Press Baltimore 0-8018-4614-5 1993 Thomas P. Hughes ] By a suitable choice of utility frequency, both lighting and motor loads could be served. Rotary converter s and later mercury-arc valve s and other rectifier equipment allowed DC to be provided where needed. Generating stations and loads using different frequencies could be interconnected using rotary converters. By using common generating plants for every type of load, important economies of scale were achieved, lower overall capital investment was required, load factor on each plant was increased allowing for higher efficiency, a lower cost for the consumer and increased overall use of electric power. By allowing multiple generating plants to be interconnected over a wide area, electricity production cost was reduced. The most efficient available plants could be used to supply the varying loads during the day. Reliability was improved and capital investment cost was reduced, since stand-by generating capacity could be shared over many more customers and a wider geographic area. Remote and low-cost sources of energy, such as hydroelectric power or mine-mouth coal, could be exploited to lower energy production cost. The first transmission of three-phase alternating current using high voltage took place in 1891 during the international electricity exhibition in Frankfurt. A 25  kV transmission line, approximately 175  km long, connected Lauffen on the Neckar and Frankfurt. Voltages used for electric power transmission increased throughout the 20th century. By 1914, fifty-five transmission systems each operating at more than 70  kV were in service. The highest voltage then used was 150  kV. { Bureau of Census data reprinted in Hughes, pp. 282–283 } The rapid industrialization in the 20th century made electrical transmission lines and grids a critical part of the infrastructure in most industrialized nations. Interconnection of local generation plants and small distribution networks was greatly spurred by the requirements of World War I, with large electrical generating plants built by governments to provide power to munitions factories. Later these generating plants were connected to supply civil loads through long-distance transmission. { Hughes, pp. 293–295 } [ Bulk power transmission ] { transmission substation decreases the voltage of incoming electricity, allowing it to connect from long distance high voltage transmission, to local lower voltage distribution. It also reroutes power to other transmission lines that serve local markets. This is the } { PacifiCorp Hale Substation, } { Orem, Utah, USA. } Engineers design transmission networks to transport the energy as efficiently as feasible, while at the same time taking into account economic factors, network safety and redundancy. These networks use components such as power lines, cables, circuit breaker s, switches and transformer s. The transmission network is usually administered on a regional basis by an entity such as a regional transmission organization or transmission system operator. Transmission efficiency is hugely improved by devices that increase the voltage, and proportionately reduce the current in the conductors, thus keeping the power transmitted nearly equal to the power input. The reduced current flowing through the line reduces the losses in the conductors. According to Joule&apos;s Law, energy losses are directly proportional to the square of the current. Thus, reducing the current by a factor of 2 will lower the energy lost to conductor resistance by a factor of 4. This change in voltage is usually achieved in AC circuits using a step-up transformer. HVDC systems require relatively costly conversion equipment which may be economically justified for particular projects, but are less common currently. A transmission grid is a network of power stations, transmission circuits, and substations. Energy is usually transmitted within a grid with three-phase AC. Single phase AC is used only for distribution to end users since it is not usable for large polyphase induction motor s. In the 19th century, two-phase transmission was used but required either three wires with unequal currents or four wires. Higher order phase systems require more than three wires, but deliver marginal benefits. { synchronous grids of } { Europe. } The capital cost of electric power stations is so high, and electric demand is so variable, that it is often cheaper to import some portion of the needed power than to generate it locally. Because nearby loads are often correlated (hot weather in the Southwest portion of the US might cause many people to use air conditioners), electricity often comes from distant sources. Because of the economics of load balancing, wide area transmission grids now span across countries and even large portions of continents. The web of interconnections between power producers and consumers ensures that power can flow, even if a few links are inoperative. The unvarying (or slowly varying over many hours) portion of the electric demand is known as the base load and is generally served best by large facilities (which are therefore efficient due to economies of scale) with low variable costs for fuel and operations. Such facilities might be nuclear or coal-fired power stations, or hydroelectric, while other renewable energy sources such as concentrated solar thermal and geothermal power have the potential to provide base load power. Renewable energy sources such as solar photovoltaics, wind, wave, and tidal are, due to their intermittency, not considered &quot; base load &quot; but can still add power to the grid. The remaining power demand, if any, is supplied by peaking power plant s, which are typically smaller, faster-responding, and higher cost sources, such as combined cycle or combustion turbine plants fueled by natural gas. A high-power electrical transmission tower. Long-distance transmission of electricity (thousands of kilometers) is cheap and efficient, with costs of US$0.005–0.02/kWh (compared to annual averaged large producer costs of US$0.01–0.025/kWh, retail rates upwards of US$0.10/kWh, and multiples of retail for instantaneous suppliers at unpredicted highest demand moments). { &quot; Present Limits of Very Long Distance Transmission Systems &quot; } Thus distant suppliers can be cheaper than local sources (e.g., New York City buys a lot of electricity from Canada). Multiple local sources (even if more expensive and infrequently used) can make the transmission grid more fault tolerant to weather and other disasters that can disconnect distant suppliers. Long distance transmission allows remote renewable energy resources to be used to displace fossil fuel consumption. Hydro and wind sources cannot be moved closer to populous cities, and solar costs are lowest in remote areas where local power needs are minimal. Connection costs alone can determine whether any particular renewable alternative is economically sensible. Costs can be prohibitive for transmission lines, but various proposals for massive infrastructure investment in high capacity, very long distance super grid transmission networks could be recovered with modest usage fees. [ Grid input ] At the power station s the energy is produced at a relatively low voltage between about 2.3  kV and 30  kV, depending on the size of the unit. The generator terminal voltage is then stepped up by the power station transformer to a higher voltage (115  kV to 765  kV AC, varying by the transmission system and by country) for transmission over long distances. [ Losses ] Transmitting electricity at high voltage reduces the fraction of energy lost to resistance, which averages around 7%. { Hutchingson, Alex. &quot; The New Energy Fixes: 10 Fixes. &quot; Popular Mechanics. June 2011: 73. Print. } For a given amount of power, a higher voltage reduces the current and thus the resistive loss es in the conductor. For example, raising the voltage by a factor of 10 reduces the current by a corresponding factor of 10 and therefore the I 2 R losses by a factor of 100, provided the same sized conductors are used in both cases. Even if the conductor size (cross-sectional area) is reduced 10-fold to match the lower current the I 2 R losses are still reduced 10-fold. Long distance transmission is typically done with overhead lines at voltages of 115 to 1,200  kV. At extremely high voltages, more than 2,000  kV between conductor and ground, corona discharge losses are so large that they can offset the lower resistance loss in the line conductors. Measures to reduce corona losses include conductors having large diameter; often hollow to save weight, { California Public Utilities Commission Corona and induced currents } or bundles of two or more conductors. Transmission and distribution losses in the USA were estimated at 6.6% in 1997 [ http://tonto.eia.doe.gov/tools/faqs/faq.cfm?id%3D105%26amp%3Bt%3D3 Where can I find data on electricity transmission and distribution losses? 2009-11-19 Frequently Asked Questions – Electricity U.S. Energy Information Administration 2011-03-29 ] and 6.5% in 2007. In general, losses are estimated from the discrepancy between energy produced (as reported by power plants) and energy sold to end customers; the difference between what is produced and what is consumed constitute transmission and distribution losses. As of 1980, the longest cost-effective distance for DC electricity was determined to be [ 7000 km mi on ]. For AC it was [ 4000 km mi on ], though all transmission lines in use today are substantially shorter. [ http://www.geni.org/globalenergy/library/technical-articles/transmission/cigre/present-limits-of-very-long-distance-transmission-systems/index.shtml Present Limits of Very Long Distance Transmission Systems L. Paris et al. 1984 CIGRE Global Energy Network Institute 2011-03-29 ] In an alternating current circuit, the inductance and capacitance of the phase conductors can be significant. The currents that flow in these components of the circuit impedance constitute reactive power, which transmits no energy to the load. Reactive current causes extra losses in the transmission circuit. The ratio of real power (transmitted to the load) to apparent power is the power factor. As reactive current increases, the reactive power increases and the power factor decreases. For systems with low power factors, losses are higher than for systems with high power factors. Utilities add capacitor banks and other components (such as phase-shifting transformer s; static VAR compensator s; physical transposition of the phase conductors; and flexible AC transmission system s, FACTS) throughout the system to control reactive power flow for reduction of losses and stabilization of system voltage. [ Subtransmission ] Subtransmission is part of an electric power transmission system that runs at relatively lower voltages. It is uneconomical to connect all distribution substation s to the high main transmission voltage, because the equipment is larger and more expensive. Typically, only larger substations connect with this high voltage. It is stepped down and sent to smaller substations in towns and neighborhoods. Subtransmission circuits are usually arranged in loops so that a single line failure does not cut off service to a large number of customers for more than a short time. While subtransmission circuits are usually carried on overhead lines, in urban areas buried cable may be used. There is no fixed cutoff between subtransmission and transmission, or subtransmission and distribution. The voltage ranges overlap somewhat. Voltages of 69 kV, 115 kV and 138 kV are often used for subtransmission in North America. As power systems evolved, voltages formerly used for transmission were used for subtransmission, and subtransmission voltages became distribution voltages. Like transmission, subtransmission moves relatively large amounts of power, and like distribution, subtransmission covers an area instead of just point to point. { Donald G. Fink and H. Wayne Beaty, Standard Handbook for Electrical Engineers (15th Edition) McGraw-Hill, 2007 ISBN 978-0-07-144146-9 section 18.5 } [ Transmission grid exit ] At the substations, transformers reduce the voltage to a lower level for distribution to commercial and residential users. This distribution is accomplished with a combination of sub-transmission (33 kV to 132 kV) and distribution (3.3 to 25  kV). Finally, at the point of use, the energy is transformed to low voltage (varying by country and customer requirements—see mains power systems ). [ High-voltage direct current ] [ High-voltage direct current ] High-voltage direct current (HVDC) is used to transmit large amounts of power over long distances or for interconnections between asynchronous grids. When electrical energy is required to be transmitted over very long distances, it is more economical to transmit using direct current instead of alternating current. For a long transmission line, the lower losses and reduced construction cost of a DC line can offset the additional cost of converter stations at each end. Also, at high AC voltages, significant (although economically acceptable) amounts of energy are lost due to corona discharge, the capacitance between phases or, in the case of buried cables, between phases and the soil or water in which the cable is buried. HVDC is also used for long submarine cables because over about 30  km length AC can no longer be applied. In that case special high voltage cable s for DC are built. Many submarine cable connections – up to 600  km length – are in use nowadays. HVDC links are sometimes used to stabilize against control problems with the AC electricity flow. The power transmitted by an AC line increases as the phase angle between source end voltage and destination ends increases, but too great a phase angle will allow the generators at either end of the line to fall out of step. Since the power flow in a DC link is controlled independently of the phases of the AC networks at either end of the link, this stability limit does not apply to a DC line, and it can transfer its full thermal rating. A DC link stabilizes the AC grids at either end, since power flow and phase angle can be controlled independently. As an example, to adjust the flow of AC power on a hypothetical line between Seattle and Boston would require adjustment of the relative phase of the two electrical grids. This is an everyday occurance in AC systems, but one that can occasionally fail when AC system components fail and place sudden loads on a remaining working grid system. With an HVDC line instead, such an interconnection would: (1) Convert AC in Seattle into HVDC. (2) Use HVDC for the three thousand miles of cross country transmission. Then (3) convert the HVDC to locally synchronized AC in Boston, and optionally in other cooperating cities along the transmission route. Such a system would be less prone to cascade failures if part of it were suddenly shut down. One prominent example of such a transmission line is the Pacific DC Intertie located in the Western United States. [ Limitations ] The amount of power that can be sent over a transmission line is limited. The origins of the limits vary depending on the length of the line. For a short line, the heating of conductors due to line losses sets a thermal limit. If too much current is drawn, conductors may sag too close to the ground, or conductors and equipment may be damaged by overheating. For intermediate-length lines on the order of [ 100 km mi on ], the limit is set by the voltage drop in the line. For longer AC lines, system stability sets the limit to the power that can be transferred. Approximately, the power flowing over an AC line is proportional to the cosine of the phase angle of the voltage and current at the receiving and transmitting ends. Since this angle varies depending on system loading and generation, it is undesirable for the angle to approach 90 degrees. Very approximately, the allowable product of line length and maximum load is proportional to the square of the system voltage. Series capacitors or phase-shifting transformers are used on long lines to improve stability. High-voltage direct current lines are restricted only by thermal and voltage drop limits, since the phase angle is not material to their operation. Up to now, it has been almost impossible to foresee the temperature distribution along the cable route, so that the maximum applicable current load was usually set as a compromise between understanding of operation conditions and risk minimization. The availability of industrial Distributed Temperature Sensing (DTS) systems that measure in real time temperatures all along the cable is a first step in monitoring the transmission system capacity. This monitoring solution is based on using passive optical fibers as temperature sensors, either integrated directly inside a high voltage cable or mounted externally on the cable insulation. A solution for overhead lines is also available. In this case the optical fiber is integrated into the core of a phase wire of overhead transmission lines (OPPC). The integrated Dynamic Cable Rating (DCR) or also called Real Time Thermal Rating (RTTR) solution enables not only to continuously monitor the temperature of a high voltage cable circuit in real time, but to safely utilize the existing network capacity to its maximum. Furthermore it provides the ability to the operator to predict the behavior of the transmission system upon major changes made to its initial operating conditions. [ Control ] To ensure safe and predictable operation the components of the transmission system are controlled with generators, switches, circuit breakers and loads. The voltage, power, frequency, load factor, and reliability capabilities of the transmission system are designed to provide cost effective performance for the customers. [ Load balancing ] The transmission system provides for base load and peak load capability, with safety and fault tolerance margins. The peak load times vary by region largely due to the industry mix. In very hot and very cold climates home air conditioning and heating loads have an effect on the overall load. They are typically highest in the late afternoon in the hottest part of the year and in mid-mornings and mid-evenings in the coldest part of the year. This makes the power requirements vary by the season and the time of day. Distribution system designs always take the base load and the peak load into consideration. The transmission system usually does not have a large buffering capability to match the loads with the generation. Thus generation has to be kept matched to the load, to prevent overloading failures of the generation equipment. Multiple sources and loads can be connected to the transmission system and they must be controlled to provide orderly transfer of power. In centralized power generation, only local control of generation is necessary, and it involves synchronization of the generation units, to prevent large transients and overload conditions. In distributed power generation the generators are geographically distributed and the process to bring them online and offline must be carefully controlled. The load control signals can either be sent on separate lines or on the power lines themselves. To load balance the voltage and frequency can be used as a signaling mechanism. In voltage signaling, the variation of voltage is used to increase generation. The power added by any system increases as the line voltage decreases. This arrangement is stable in principle. Voltage based regulation is complex to use in mesh networks, since the individual components and setpoints would need to be reconfigured every time a new generator is added to the mesh. In frequency signaling, the generating units match the frequency of the power transmission system. In droop speed control, if the frequency decreases, the power is increased. (The drop in line frequency is an indication that the increased load is causing the generators to slow down.) Wind turbines, v2g and other distributed storage and generation systems can be connected to the power grid, and interact with it to improve system operation. [ Failure protection ] Under excess load conditions, the system can be designed to fail gracefully rather than all at once. Brownouts occur when the supply power drops below the demand. Blackouts occur when the supply fails completely. Rolling blackout s (also called load shedding) are intentionally engineered electrical power outages, used to distribute insufficient power when the demand for electricity exceeds the supply. [ Communications ] Operators of long transmission lines require reliable communications for control of the power grid and, often, associated generation and distribution facilities. Fault-sensing protective relay s at each end of the line must communicate to monitor the flow of power into and out of the protected line section so that faulted conductors or equipment can be quickly de-energized and the balance of the system restored. Protection of the transmission line from short circuit s and other faults is usually so critical that common carrier telecommunications are insufficiently reliable, and in remote areas a common carrier may not be available. Communication systems associated with a transmission project may use: Microwave s Power line communication Optical fiber s Rarely, and for short distances, a utility will use pilot-wires strung along the transmission line path. Leased circuits from common carriers are not preferred since availability is not under control of the electric power transmission organization. Transmission lines can also be used to carry data: this is called power-line carrier, or PLC. PLC signals can be easily received with a radio for the long wave range. Optical fibers can be included in the stranded conductors of a transmission line, in the overhead shield wires. These cables are known as optical ground wire ( OPGW ). Sometimes a standalone cable is used, all-dielectric self-supporting (ADSS) cable, attached to the transmission line cross arms. Some jurisdictions, such as Minnesota, prohibit energy transmission companies from selling surplus communication bandwidth or acting as a telecommunications common carrier. Where the regulatory structure permits, the utility can sell capacity in extra dark fiber s to a common carrier, providing another revenue stream. [ Electricity market reform ] [ Electricity market ] Some regulators regard electric transmission to be a natural monopoly [ http://www.thehindubusinessline.com/iw/2004/08/15/stories/2004081501201300.htm Power transmission business is a natural monopoly Raghuvir Srinivasan The Hindu The Hindu Business Line August 15, 2004 January 31, 2008 ] [ http://www.reason.org/commentaries/kiesling_20030818b.shtml Rethink the Natural Monopoly Justification of Electricity Regulation Lynne Kiesling Reason Foundation August 18, 2003 January 31, 2008 ] and there are moves in many countries to separately regulate transmission (see electricity market ). Spain was the first country to establish a regional transmission organization. In that country transmission operations and market operations are controlled by separate companies. The transmission system operator is Red Eléctrica de España (REE) and the wholesale electricity market operator is Operador del Mercado Ibérico de Energía – Polo Español, S.A. (OMEL). Spain&apos;s transmission system is interconnected with those of France, Portugal, and Morocco. In the United States and parts of Canada, electrical transmission companies operate independently of generation and distribution companies. [ Cost of electric power transmission ] The cost of high voltage electricity transmission (as opposed to the costs of electricity distribution ) is comparatively low, compared to all other costs arising in a consumer&apos;s electricity bill. In the UK transmission costs are about 0.2p/kWh compared to a delivered domestic price of around 10 p/kWh. { http://www.claverton-energy.com/what-is-the-cost-per-kwh-of-bulk-transmission-national-grid-in-the-uk-note-this-excludes-distribution-costs.html What is the cost per kWh of bulk transmission / National Grid in the UK (note this excludes distribution costs) } Research evaluates the level of capital expenditure in the electric power T &amp; D equipment market will be worth $128.9bn in 2011. { visiongain The Electric Power Transmission &amp; Distribution (T &amp; D) Equipment Market 2011–2021 http://www.visiongain.com/Report/626/The-Electric-Power-Transmission-and-Distribution-(T-D)-Equipment-Market-2011-2021 } [ Merchant transmission ] Merchant transmission is an arrangement where a third party constructs and operates electric transmission lines through the franchise area of an unrelated utility. Operating merchant transmission projects in the United States include the Cross Sound Cable from Long Island, New York to New Haven, Connecticut, Neptune RTS Transmission Line from Sayreville, N.J., to Newbridge, N.Y, ITC Holdings, Inc. transmission system in the midwest, and Path 15 in California. Additional projects are in development or have been proposed throughout the United States. There is only one unregulated or market interconnector in Australia : Basslink between Tasmania and Victoria. Two DC links originally implemented as market interconnectors Directlink and Murraylink have been converted to regulated interconnectors. NEMMCO A major barrier to wider adoption of merchant transmission is the difficulty in identifying who benefits from the facility so that the beneficiaries will pay the toll. Also, it is difficult for a merchant transmission line to compete when the alternative transmission lines are subsidized by other utility businesses. [ Fiona Woolf Global Transmission Expansion Pennwell Books February 2003 226, 247 0-87814-862-0 ] [ Health concerns ] [ Electromagnetic radiation and health ] Some large studies, including a large United States study, have failed to find any link between living near power lines and developing any sickness or diseases such as cancer. One old study from 1997 found that it did not matter how close you were to a power line or a sub-station, there was no increased risk of cancer or illness. { Power Lines and Cancer, } { The Health Report / ABC Science - Broadcast on 7 June 1997 (Australian Broadcasting Corporation) } The mainstream scientific evidence suggests that low-power, low-frequency, electromagnetic radiation associated with household currents and high transmission power lines does not constitute a short or long term health hazard. Some studies, however, have found statistical correlation s between various diseases and living or working near power lines. No adverse health effects have been substantiated for people not living close to powerlines. { Electromagnetic fields and public health, } { World Health Organization } There are established biological effects for acute high level exposure to magnetic fields well above 100 µT (1000 mG). In a residential setting, there is &quot; limited evidence of carcinogenicity in humans and less than sufficient evidence for carcinogenicity in experimental animals &quot;, in particular, childhood leukaemia, associated with average exposure to residential power-frequency magnetic field above 0.3 µT (3 mG) to 0.4 µT (4 mG). These levels exceed average residential power-frequency magnetic fields in homes which are about 0.07 µT (0.7 mG) in Europe and 0.11 µT (1.1 mG) in North America. [ http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs322/en/index.html Electromagnetic fields and public health 2008-01-23 2007 June Fact sheet No. 322 World Health Organization ] [ http://www.niehs.nih.gov/health/docs/emf-02.pdf Electric and Magnetic Fields Associated with the Use of Power 2008-01-29 2002-06 PDF National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences ] [ Government policy ] Historically, local governments have exercised authority over the grid and have significant disincentives to take action that would benefit states other than their own. Localities with cheap electricity have a disincentive to making interstate commerce in electricity trading easier, since other regions will be able to compete for local energy and drive up rates. Some regulators in Maine for example do not wish to address congestion problems because the congestion serves to keep Maine rates low. [ http://www.oe.energy.gov/DocumentsandMedia/primer.pdf Electricity Transmission: A primer National Council on Electricity Policy 32 (41 in pdf) pdf ] Further, vocal local constituencies can block or slow permitting by pointing to visual impact, environmental, and perceived health concerns. In the US, generation is growing 4 times faster than transmission, but big transmission upgrades require the coordination of multiple states, a multitude of interlocking permits, and cooperation between a significant portion of the 500 companies that own the grid. From a policy perspective, the control of the grid is balkanized, and even former energy secretary Bill Richardson refers to it as a third world grid. There have been efforts in the EU and US to confront the problem. The US national security interest in significantly growing transmission capacity drove passage of the 2005 energy act giving the Department of Energy the authority to approve transmission if states refuse to act. However, soon after using its power to designate two National Interest Electric Transmission Corridor s, 14 senators signed a letter stating the DOE was being too aggressive. [ Wald Matthew Wind Energy Bumps Into Power Grid&apos;s Limits August 27, 2008 A1 December 12, 2008 New York Times http://www.nytimes.com/2008/08/27/business/27grid.html?_r%3D2%26amp%3Bref%3Dbusiness%26amp%3Boref%3Dslogin ] [ Special transmission ] [ Grids for railways ] [ Traction power network ] In some countries where electric train s [ January 2012 ] run on low frequency AC (e.g., 16.7  Hz and 25  Hz) power, there are separate single phase traction power network s operated by the railways. These grids are fed by separate generators in some traction powerstation s or by traction current converter plant s from the public three phase AC network. [ Superconducting cables ] High-temperature superconductor s promise to revolutionize power distribution by providing lossless transmission of electrical power. The development of superconductors with transition temperatures higher than the boiling point of liquid nitrogen has made the concept of superconducting power lines commercially feasible, at least for high-load applications. { Jacob Oestergaard et al., Energy losses of superconducting power transmission cables in the grid, } It has been estimated that the waste would be halved using this method, since the necessary refrigeration equipment would consume about half the power saved by the elimination of the majority of resistive losses. Some companies such as Consolidated Edison and American Superconductor have already begun commercial production of such systems. { 600m superconducting electricity line layed in New York } In one hypothetical future system called a SuperGrid, the cost of cooling would be eliminated by coupling the transmission line with a liquid hydrogen pipeline. Superconducting cables are particularly suited to high load density areas such as the business district of large cities, where purchase of an easement for cables would be very costly. { http://www.futureenergies.com/print.php?sid=237 } [ Single wire earth return ] [ Single-wire earth return ] Single-wire earth return (SWER) or single wire ground return is a single-wire transmission line for supplying single-phase electrical power for an electrical grid to remote areas at low cost. It is principally used for rural electrification, but also finds use for larger isolated loads such as water pumps, and light rail. Single wire earth return is also used for HVDC over submarine power cables. [ Wireless power transmission ] [ Wireless energy transfer ] Both Nikola Tesla and Hidetsugu Yagi attempted to devise systems for large scale wireless power transmission, with no commercial success. In November 2009, LaserMotive won the NASA 2009 Power Beaming Challenge by powering a cable climber 1  km vertically using a ground-based laser transmitter. The system produced up to 1  kW of power at the receiver end. In August 2010, NASA contracted with private companies to pursue the design of laser power beaming systems to power low earth orbit satellites and to launch rockets using laser power beams. Wireless power transmission has been studied for transmission of power from solar power satellite s to the earth. A high power array of microwave or laser transmitters would beam power to a rectenna. Major engineering and economic challenges face any solar power satellite project. [ Security of control systems ] The Federal government of the United States admits that the power grid is susceptible to cyber-warfare. { BBC: Spies &apos;infiltrate US power grid&apos; } { CNN: Video } The United States Department of Homeland Security works with industry to identify vulnerabilities and to help industry enhance the security of control system networks, the federal government is also working to ensure that security is built in as the U.S. develops the next generation of &apos;smart grid&apos; networks. { Reuters: US concerned power grid vulnerable to cyber-attack } [ Records ] [ http://www.geni.org/globalenergy/library/technical-articles/transmission/united-nations/center-for-science-and-technology-for-development/advanced-technology-assessment-system/energy-systems-environment-and-development.shtml Energy Systems, Environment and Development Advanced Technology Assessment Systems 6 Autumn 1991 Global Energy Network Institute December 27, 2008 ] [ 345 m ft 0 on / ] [ 1700 km mi 0 / ] [ 5376 m ft 0 on ] [ 580 km mi 0 / ] [ 290 km mi 0 / ] [ 370.1 km mi 0 / ] [ 238 km mi 0 / ] [ 250 km mi 0 / ] [ 262 km mi 0 / ] NorNed, North Sea – (length of submarine cable: ) Basslink, Bass Strait – (length of submarine cable:, total length: ) Baltic-Cable, Baltic Sea – (length of submarine cable:, HVDC length:, total length: ) { Longest underground cables: } [ 180 km mi 0 / ] Murraylink, Riverland / Sunraysia – (length of underground cable: ) [ See also ] [ Energy ] Distributed generation Electricity distribution Electricity pylon Mains electricity Mains power around the world (list of voltage by country) Overhead power line Power outage Electricity market: Electricity market Dynamic demand (electric power) Demand response Technical: Conductor marking lights Double-circuit transmission line Electromagnetic Transients Program (EMTP) Flexible AC transmission system (FACTS) Geomagnetically induced current, (GIC) Grid-tied electrical system High-voltage direct current (HVDC) List of high voltage underground and submarine cables Load profile Power line communication s (PLC) Power System Harmonics Radio frequency power transmission Submarine power cable Three-phase electric power Wireless energy transfer Wheeling (electric power transmission) Amtrak&apos;s 25 Hz traction power system General: Relative cost of electricity generated by different sources Off-the-grid, living without public utility Miesbach-Munich Power Transmission (first power transmission) Green power grid Infrastructure Transport: Traction current (rail) Traction power network Vehicle-to-grid [ Notes ] [ 2 ] [ Further reading ] [ Reilly, Helen Connecting the Country – New Zealand’s National Grid 1886 – 2007 Wellington Steele Roberts 2008 376 pages. 978-1-877448-40-9 ] Grigsby, L. L., et al. The Electric Power Engineering Handbook. USA: CRC Press. (2001). ISBN 0-8493-8578-4 Thomas P. Hughes, Networks of Power: Electrification in Western Society 1880–1930, The Johns Hopkins University Press,Baltimore 1983 ISBN 0-8018-2873-2, an excellent overview of development during the first 50 years of commercial electric power Westinghouse Electric Corporation, &quot; Electric power transmission patents; Tesla polyphase system &quot;. (Transmission of power; polyphase system; Tesla patents ) Pansini, Anthony J, E.E., P.E. undergrounding electric lines. USA Hayden Book Co, 1978. ISBN 0-8104-0827-9 [ Maps ] Electric power transmission systems ( worldwide) based on Openstreetmap-Data [ External links ] [ grid electricity ] Japan: World&apos;s First In-Grid High-Temperature Superconducting Power Cable System A Power Grid for the Hydrogen Economy: Overview/A Continental SuperGrid Global Energy Network Institute (GENI) – The GENI Initiative focuses on linking renewable energy resources around the world using international electricity transmission. Union for the Co-ordination of Transmission of Electricity (UCTE), the association of transmission system operators in continental Europe, running one of the two largest power transmission systems in the world Non-Ionizing Radiation, Part 1: Static and Extremely Low-Frequency (ELF) Electric and Magnetic Fields (2002) by the IARC – Link Broken. A Simulation of the Power Grid – The Trustworthy Cyber Infrastructure for the Power Grid (TCIP) group at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign has developed lessons and an applet which illustrate the transmission of electricity from generators to energy consumers, and allows the user to manipulate generation, consumption, and power flow. Category:Electrical engineering Category:Monopoly (economics) Category:Electrical safety af:Kraggeleiding als:Hochspannungsleitung ar:نقل الكهرباء bn:বিদ্যুৎশক্তি সঞ্চালন be:Лінія электраперадачы be-x-old:Лінія электраперадачы bg:Пренос на електрическа енергия ca:Xarxa de transport d&apos;energia elèctrica cs:Přenosová soustava de:Stromnetz es:Red de transporte de energía eléctrica eo:Transmisio de elektra energio fa:انتقال انرژی الکتریکی fr:Réseau électrique ko:송전 hi:विद्युतशक्ति का प्रेषण it:Trasmissione di energia elettrica la:Systema electricitatem subministrandi lt:Elektros perdavimo linija hu:Átviteli hálózat mr:विद्युत उर्जा पारेषण ms:Pembekalan kuasa elektrik nl:Hoogspanningsnet ja:送電 no:Fordelingsnett nn:Elnett pl:Sieć wysokiego napięcia pt:Transmissão de energia elétrica ru:Линия электропередачи simple:Electric power transmission fi:Sähköverkko sv:Kraftledning ta:மின்திறன் செலுத்தல் tr:Elektrik iletim hattı uk:Лінія електропередавання zh:輸電系統