[ the palace in Dresden the Swiss scholar Theodor Zwinger the defensive structure of a castle Ward (fortification) ] Inside the Zwinger. { photochrome print around 1900 } The Zwinger (Der Dresdner Zwinger) is a palace in Dresden, eastern Germany, built in Rococo style. It served as the orangery, exhibition gallery and festival arena of the Dresden Court. The location was formerly part of the Dresden fortress of which the outer wall is conserved. The name derives from the German word Zwinger (outer ward of a concentric castle ); it was for the cannons that were placed between the outer wall and the major wall. The Zwinger was not enclosed until the Neoclassical building by Gottfried Semper called the Semper Gallery was built on its northern side. Today, the Zwinger is a museum complex that contains the Gemäldegalerie Alte Meister (Old Masters Picture Gallery), the Dresden Porcelain Collection (Porzellansammlung), the Armory (Rüstkammer) and the Mathematisch-Physikalischer Salon (Royal Cabinet of Mathematical and Physical Instruments). [ Current inner city location ] The Zwinger covers an area on the northwestern edge of the Innere Altstadt ( &quot; inner old town &quot; ) that is part of the historic heart of Dresden. It is located in the immediate vicinity of other famous sights, including Dresden Palace and the Semperoper opera house. The Zwinger is bounded by Sophienstraße in the southeast, Postplatz in the south, Ostra-Allee in the southwest, the Am Zwingerteich road in the northwest and Theatre Square (Theaterplatz) in the east. Nearby buildings include the Dresden State Theatre to the southwest, the Haus am Zwinger to the south, the Taschenbergpalais hotel to the southeast, the west wing of the palace with its Green Vault to the east, the Altstädtische Hauptwache to the northeast, the Semper Opera to the north and the former royal stables to the northwest. Within view lie the Catholic Court Church and the Italian Village in Theatre Square, the Wilsdruffer Kubus on Postplatz and The Duchess Garden with the remnants of the former orangery building in the west. The terraced banks of the River Elbe are located 200 metres northeast of the Zwinger. [ History ] [ Origin of the name ] Picture of Dresden around 1521 with the course of the nearby Weißeritz river (top left) The name Zwinger goes back to the common medieval German term for that part of a fortification between the outer and inner defensive walls, or &quot; outer ward &quot;. Archaeological evidence indicates that the construction of the first city wall took place in the last quarter of the 12th century. A documentary entry as civitas in 1216 points to the existence of an enclosed Dresden Fortification at that time.In 1427, during the Hussite Wars, work began on strengthening the city&apos;s defences and they were enhanced by a second - outer - wall. These improvements began near the Wildruffer Tor gate. Step by step the old moat had to be filled in and moved. The area between the two walls was generally referred to as the Zwinger and, in the vicinity of the castle, was utilised by the royal court at Dresden for garden purposes. The location of the so-called Zwingergarten from that period is only imprecisely known to be between the fortifications on the western side of the city. { Gurlitt: Kunstdenkmäler Dresdens, H. 2, p. 313 } { Otto Richter: Verfassungsgeschichte der Stadt Dresden. Volume One. Dresden 1885, p. 8–9 } Its extent varied in places as a result of subsequent improvements to the fortifications and is depicted differently on the various maps. This royal Zwingergarten, a garden used to supply the court, still fulfilled one of its functions, as indicated by the name, as a narrow defensive area between the outer and inner defensive walls. This was no longer the case when work on the present-day Zwinger palace began in the early 18th century, nevertheless the name was transferred to the new building. Admittedly the southwestern parts of the building of the baroque Dresden Zwinger including the Kronentor gate stand on parts of the outer curtain wall that are still visible today; but there is no longer any trace of the inner wall. { Dehio, Dresden, 2005. p. 52 } [ Early development of the city in the area of the Zwinger ] Until well into the 16th century, the area of the present-day Zwinger comples was still outside the city fortifications. Close by ran an old stretch of the River Weißeritz that no longer exists, which emptied into the Elbe by the Old Castle. In 1569, major work began on redevelopment and new buildings by the fortifications west of the castle based on plans by master builder, Rochus Quirin, Count of Lynar, who came from Florence. The embankments needed in the area of the river confluence proved to be a major challenge. In spring 1570 the Weißeritz caused severe flood damage at a embankment, which hampered the building project for a short time. Then, in 1572, the rebuilding work by the fortifications came to a temporary halt. { Gurlitt: Kunstdenkmäler Dresdens, H. 2, p. 327–328 } Plan of the city of Dresden in 1750 with the fortifications by the Zwinger by Lynar (left half of the picture, north is to the right) [ Early history ] Augustus the Strong, elector of Saxony, returned from a grand tour through France and Italy in 1687 –89, just at the moment that Louis XIV moved his court to Versailles. On his return to Dresden, having arranged his election as King of Poland (1697), he wanted something similarly spectacular for himself. The fortifications were no longer needed and provided readily available space for his plans. The original plans, as developed by his court architect Matthäus Daniel Pöppelmann before 1711, covered the space of the present complex of palace and garden, and also included as gardens the space down to the Elbe River, upon which the Semper opera house and its square were built in the nineteenth century. The Zwinger was designed by Pöppelmann and constructed in stages from 1710 to 1728. Sculpture was provided by Balthasar Permoser. The Zwinger was formally inaugurated in 1719, on the occasion of the electoral prince Frederick August ’s marriage to the daughter of the Habsburg emperor, the Archduchess Maria Josepha. At the time, the outer shells of the buildings had already been erected and, with their pavilions and arcaded galleries, formed a striking backdrop to the event. It was not until the completion of their interiors in 1728, however, that they could serve their intended functions as exhibition galleries and library halls. The death of Augustus in 1733 put a halt to the construction because the funds were needed elsewhere. The palace area was left open towards the Semperoper square (Theatre Square) and the river. Later the plans were changed to a smaller scale, and in 1847 –1855 the area was closed by the construction of the gallery wing now separating the Zwinger from the Theatre Square. The architect of this building, later named Semper Gallery, was Gottfried Semper, who also designed the opera house. [ Destruction and rebuilding ] Ruins of the wall pavilion in 1945. The building was mostly destroyed by the carpet bombing raids of 13–15 February 1945. The art collection had been previously evacuated, however. After the war, in a referendum, the people of Dresden voted to restore the building and generally preferred to rebuild the glories of the city, instead of having the ruins razed to make way for the architecture of socialist realism then prevalent in the German Democratic Republic. [ See also ] Dresden Castle – Residence of the electors and kings of Saxony Pillnitz Castle – Summer residence of the electors and kings of Saxony Moritzburg Castle – Hunting lodge of the electors and kings of Saxony List of castles in Saxony List of Baroque residences [ References ] [ External links ] [ Dresdner Zwinger ] Map of the Zwinger Zwinger and its Museums at Staatliche Kunstsammlungen Dresden Homepage of Staatliche Kunstsammlungen Dresden Schlösser und Gärten Dresden [ 51 03 11 N 13 44 02 E region:DE-SN_type:landmark title ] Category:Palaces in Dresden Category:Art museums and galleries in Dresden Category:Buildings and structures completed in 1728 Category:Baroque architecture in Dresden Category:Rebuilt buildings and structures in Germany be:Цвінгер bg:Цвингер cs:Zwinger de:Zwinger (Dresden) el:Τσβίνγκερ es:Zwinger eu:Zwinger fr:Zwinger it:Zwinger (Dresda) he:צווינגר ka:ცვინგერის სასახლე (დრეზდენი) lb:Zwinger lt:Cvingeris nl:Zwinger ja:ツヴィンガー宮殿 no:Zwinger nn:Zwinger pl:Zwinger ro:Palatul Zwinger din Dresda ru:Цвингер sk:Zwinger (Drážďany) fi:Zwinger sv:Zwinger uk:Цвінґер zh:茨温格宫