[ Cao Ren General Cao Wei 168 223 (aged 55) 曹仁 曹仁 Cáo Rén Ts&apos;ao Jen Zixiao (子孝) Marquis Zhong ] [ Cao ] Cao Ren (168 – 223 [ de Crespigny, Rafe A biographical dictionary of Later Han to the Three Kingdoms (23–220  AD) Brill 2007 978-90-04-15605-0 46 ] ) was a military general serving under the warlord Cao Cao during the late Han Dynasty and Three Kingdoms era of Chinese history. He played a significant part in assisting Cao Cao in the civil wars leading to the end of the Han Dynasty. He was also credited with the establishment of the state of Cao Wei, and was assigned as the Grand Commander when Cao Pi ascended the throne. [ Biography ] [ Early life and career ] Born in the county of Qiao (谯, present day Bozhou, Anhui ), Cao Ren was a younger cousin of Cao Cao. His grandfather and father had both held civil and military posts for Eastern Han. Cao Ren was fond of hunting on horseback and archery, and behaved unlawfully in his youth. { It was recorded in Records of Three Kingdoms that Cao Ren did not comply with the law during his youth, but became a straight general who never violated the military code after he grew up. } During the Yellow Turban Rebellion, he gathered more than a thousand young men under his flag and wandered the area between Huai River and Si River (泗水). In 190, Cao Cao started raising an army to join the coalition against Dong Zhuo, the tyrannical warlord who was holding the emperor hostage in the imperial capital of Luoyang. Cao Ren and his followers then joined Cao Cao. Throughout the early 190s he accompanied Cao Cao on various campaigns around northern China, against Dong Zhuo, Yuan Shu, Tao Qian (陶谦) and Lü Bu. Although many hardships were experienced, Cao Cao largely defeated most of his enemies in central China, and Cao Ren had shown his talent during these early campaigns, often leading a separate command to accomplish his tasks. He was particularly credited most in the campaign against Tao, which he led the vanguard in battles to slaughter anyone on his way. [ Middle career ] In 196, after Cao Cao was entrusted with the custody of Emperor Xian in Xuchang, he gave Cao Ren the position of Grand Administrator of Guangyang (广阳太守). However, Cao Ren never exercised governorship over his jurisdiction because he was retained in Xuchang as Cao Cao had better use of his military skills. Next year, Cao Ren followed Cao Cao to attack Zhang Xiu, and was authorized to lead a separate command to raid the counties around, where he hijacked and enslaved several thousand residents. Zhang feigned surrender upon Cao Cao&apos;s arrival outside Wancheng (宛城, present day Nanyang, Henan ), but later revolted against Cao Cao in the Battle of Wancheng. Caught unprepared, Cao Cao lost many troops and several trusted subjects, including his bodyguard Dian Wei, his own eldest son Cao Ang, and beloved nephew Cao An&apos;man. Zhang Xiu then pursued Cao Cao as the latter retreated north. When the morale was low, Cao Ren inspired the soldiers and encouraged them to fight, and the Cao forces eventually repelled Zhang in a counterattack. During the Battle of Guandu in 200, Yuan Shao sent Liu Bei with an army to support the rebellions against Cao Cao in Yinjiang (氵隱 疆; southwest of modern Xuchang ), roughly 8.3  km south of the capital. Cao Cao became concerned about such developments being on his doorstep, so he sent Cao Ren to quell the uprising. Cao Ren observed that Liu Bei could not have too much control over his new men given by Yuan Shao, and targeted the rebel leader Liu Pi and had him killed in battle; Liu Bei was subsequently defeated. Yuan then tried to cut off Cao Cao from the west by sending Han Meng (韓猛) { Variously recorded as Han Xun (韓荀) or Han Ruo (韓若). Leban, p. 364 } southwest. Cao Ren again responded to the threat by defeating Han at Mount Jiluo (雞洛山; 50 li northeast of Mi county, Henan). He then led a cavalry with Shi Huan (史渙) to harass Yuan&apos;s line of supply as a countermove. [ As a defender for Wei ] [ Effort to defend Jiangling ] [ Battle of Jiangling ] In 208, after he lost the Battle of Red Cliffs to the southern warlord, Sun Quan, Cao Cao retreated north, leaving Cao Ren and Xu Huang to defend the strategic city of Jiangling against the advance of Wu troops. The enemy commander Zhou Yu dispatched a several thousand-strong vanguard force to challenge them under the city wall. Realizing the morale was low after the heavy loss at Red Cliff, Cao Ren sent his aide Niu Jin (牛金) with 300 volunteers into battle, in hope they would display bravery and boost the morale, however, Niu was soon surrounded, whereupon Cao Ren rode out with dozens of horsemen and successfully rescued his subordinate. Upon his return, Cao Ren&apos;s subjects exclaimed, &quot; General, you are truly a man from Heaven! &quot; He then sent a strong cavalry force to besiege Sun Quan&apos;s general, Gan Ning at Yiling. The subsequent development of the battle was much to his disappointment: Zhou led most of the main force to Gan&apos;s rescue and destroyed his cavalry; while Cao Ren himself, along with Xu Huang, were not able to take Zhou&apos;s weakened maincamp guarded by Ling Tong. After a year of intense fighting, the loss on Cao Cao&apos;s side had accumulated to an unbearable level, and Cao Ren was ordered to retreat. Cao Ren then joined Cao Cao&apos;s campaign on pacifying Liang Province, and was appointed as the Commander to oversee the defense of Tong Pass before Cao Cao&apos;s arrival at the battlefield. After the subjugation of some local uprisings, Cao Ren was given the staff of authority and held the position of General who Conquers the South (征南将军) and garrisoned at Fan (樊), a city on the shores of the Han River that is vital to the defense of Luoyang from the direction of southern Jing Province. [ Effort to defend Fan ] [ Battle of Fancheng ] In 219, Liu Bei&apos;s most trusted general Guan Yu came in force to take Fan. Cao Ren was able to remain his line of defense with the help from Yu Jin and Pang De at the onset of the siege. However, heavy rain in summer caused the Han River to flood, as a consequence, the entirety of Yu&apos;s ground force was captured by Guan&apos;s navy. In addition to that, most of the food stock was destroyed by the flood, and the remaining was depleting fast. Since Xu Huang refused to lead the reinforcement to the scene right away, Cao Ren once thought about giving up Fan fortress, but his strategist, Man Chong reminded him that the water level would go down sooner or later and that Sun Quan would attack Guan&apos;s rear any time; thus, Cao Ren told his men that he was willing to defend the city with his own life, and everyone was touched, and agreed to hold out until Xu made his move. By the time the flood subsided, Xu had already defeated Guan Yu. Most generals requested pursuit, but Man told Cao Ren to abort further pursuit to let Guan retreat and battle with Sun Quan, and Cao Ren agreed to Man&apos;s strategy. [ Late life and career ] After Cao Pi succeeded Cao Cao, he made Cao Ren Grand General, and later promoted him to the Minister of War (大司马) to oversee the numerous armies along the Yangtze River. Cao Ren established his headquarter in Hefei, and launched an all-out offensive against Sun Quan&apos;s general at Ruxukou during the three-pronged attack coordinated by Cao Pi. However, the defender of Ruxukou, Zhu Huan, decisively defeated Cao Ren with a much smaller force. Cao Ren died in 223 and was posthumously enfeoffed as Marquis Zhong, literally meaning the loyal marquis. Indeed this was largely how he was remembered – a steadfastly loyal commander who obeyed and enforced laws and commands strictly. [ Family ] Grandfather: Cao Bao (曹褒), served as Administrator of Yingchuan Father: Cao Chi (曹熾), served as Palace Attendant and Colonel of Changshui, posthumously granted title of Marquis of Chenmu. Cao Chun, younger brother, served Cao Cao Cao Tai (曹泰), eldest son, appointed General Who Suppresses the East, granted title of Marquis of Ningling Cao Kai (曹楷), second son, granted a marquis title Cao Fan (曹范), third son, granted a marquis title Cao Chu (曹初), son of Cao Tai [ Appointments and titles held ] Senior Major (別部司馬) Colonel of Sharp Edge (厲鋒校尉) Administrator of Guangyang (廣陽太守) Marquis of Du (都亭侯) General Who Attacks the South (征南將軍) Marquis of Anping (安平亭侯) General Who Pacifies the West (安西將軍) General of Agile Cavalry (驍騎將軍) General of Chariots and Cavalry (車騎將軍) Marquis of Chen (陳侯) General-in-Chief (大將軍) Grand Marshal (大司馬) Marquis Zhong (忠侯) - granted to Cao Ren posthumously [ Modern references ] Cao Ren is featured as a playable character in Koei &apos;s Dynasty Warriors and Warriors Orochi video game series. In the collectible card game Magic: The Gathering there is a card named &quot; Cao Ren, Wei Commander &quot; in the Portal Three Kingdoms set. [ See also ] List of people of the Three Kingdoms List of Dynasty Warriors characters [ References ] [ Chen Shou Records of Three Kingdoms Yue Lu Shu She 2002 978-7-80665-198-8 ] [ Cao Ren 168 223 ] Category:168 births Category:223 deaths Category:Generals under Cao Cao Category:Cao Wei generals ca:Cao Ren de:Cao Ren fr:Cao Ren ko:조인 id:Cao Ren it:Cao Ren nl:Cao Ren ja:曹仁 no:Cao Ren pt:Cao Ren sh:Cao Ren th:โจหยิน uk:Цао Жень vi:Tào Nhân zh-classical:曹仁 zh:曹仁