[ Proso millet Panicum miliaceum0.jpg Ripe proso millet Plantae Angiosperms Monocots Commelinids Poales Poaceae Panicum P. miliaceum Panicum miliaceum L. ] Proso millet (Panicum miliaceum) is also known as common millet, hog millet or white millet. Both the wild ancestor and the location of domestication of proso millet are unknown, but it first appears as a crop in both Transcaucasia and China about 7,000 years ago, suggesting it may have been domesticated independently in each area. It is still extensively cultivated in India, Russia, Ukraine, the Middle East, Turkey and Romania. In the United States, proso is mainly grown for birdseed. It is sold as health food, and due to its lack of gluten, it can be included in the diets of people who cannot tolerate wheat. Proso is well adapted to many soil and climatic conditions; it has a short growing season, and needs little water. The water requirement of proso is probably the lowest of any major cereal. It is an excellent crop for dryland and no-till farming. Proso millet is an annual grass whose plants reach an average height of 100  cm (4 feet.) The seedheads grow in bunches. The seed s are small (2-3  mm or 0.1 inch) and can be cream, yellow, orange-red, or brown in colour. Proso is an annual grass like all other millet s, but it is not closely related to pearl millet, foxtail millet, finger millet, or the barnyard millets. [ History and domestication ] Unlike the foxtail millet, the wild ancestor of the proso millet has not yet been satisfactorily identified. Weedy forms of this grain are found in central Asia, covering a widespread area from the Caspian Sea east to Xinjiang and Mongolia, and it may be that these semiarid areas may harbor &quot; genuinely wild P. miliaceum forms. &quot; { Daniel Zohary and Maria Hopf, Domestication of plants in the Old World, third edition (Oxford: University Press, 2000), p. 83 } This millet has been reportedly found in Neolithic sites in Georgia (dated to the fifth and fourth millennia BC ), as well as excavated Yangshao culture farming villages east in China. Proso millet appears to have reached Europe not long after its appearance in Georgia, first appearing in east and central Europe; however, the grain needed a few thousand more years to cross into Italy, Greece, and Iran, and the earliest evidence for its cultivation in the Near East is a find in the ruins of Nimrud, Iraq dated to about 700 BC. { Zohary and Hopf, Domestication, p. 86 } While proso millet is not a member of the Neolithic Near East crop assemblage, it arrived in Europe no later than the time these introductions did, and proso millet as an independent domestication could predate the arrival of the Near East grain crops. [ Uses ] Proso millet is one of the few types of millet not cultivated in Africa. [ National Research Council Lost Crops of Africa: Volume I: Grains http://books.nap.edu/openbook.php?record_id%3D2305%26amp%3Bpage%3D260 2008-07-18 Lost Crops of Africa 1 1996-02-14 National Academies Press 978-0-309-04990-0 260 Ebony http://books.nap.edu/openbook.php?record_id%3D2305%26amp%3Bpage%3D252 ] In the United States, former Soviet Union, and some South American countries, it is primarily grown for livestock feed. Millet in grains [ Notes ] [ External links ] [ Millet ] Alternative Field Crops Manual: Millets Category:Millets Category:Panicum Category:Forages Category:Flora of New Jersey da:Almindelig Hirse de:Rispenhirse es:Panicum miliaceum fr:Millet commun ko:기장 hi:चेना hsb:Zornjaty włosanc it:Panicum miliaceum lt:Tikroji sora ja:キビ pl:Proso zwyczajne qu:Mihu ru:Просо обыкновенное scn:Panicum miliaceum fi:Viljahirssi ta:வரகு vi:Kê Proso zh:黍