[ April 2012 ] [ April 2012 ] This article is about the unit of administrative division; for &quot; public properties, state properties &quot; of Polish-Lithuanian Kings see: Crown lands in Poland and Lithuania (Polish: królewszczyzny, dobra królewskie); for insignia of Polish and Polish-Lithuanian Kings see: Polish Crown Jewels { Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth and its } { fiefdom s in 1619. Superimposed on present day political map of } { Central and } { Eastern Europe } The Crown of the Kingdom of Poland ( [ Korona Królestwa Polskiego ], Latin : Corona Regni Poloniae), or simply the Crown ( [ hotpink ] ), is the name for the semi-legal concept related to the Polish monarchy, or even Poland itself. In its political aspect, the concept of the Crown referred the Polish kingdom (nation) as distinctly separate from the person of the monarch. It also had a geographical aspect, as it referred to all lands that the Polish state (not the monarch) could claim to have the right to rule over. [ History ] The concept was introduced to Poland around 14th century, and was most likely transmitted from Hungary, and can be traced to England in the 12th century. { Juliusz Bardach, Boguslaw Lesnodorski, and Michal Pietrzak, Historia panstwa i prawa polskiego (Warsaw: Paristwowe Wydawnictwo Naukowe, 1987, p.85-86 } It was further strenghtened by the growing traditions of the royal elections in Poland, which helped to justify the idea that the nation is separate from the person of the king, and similar customs of parliamentary participation of nobility in the government ( sejmik, great sejm ). [ Political aspect ] It marked a milestone in the evolution of Polish statehood, and represented the concept of the Polish kingdom (nation) as distinctly separate from the person of the monarch. The introduction of that concept marked the transformation of the Polish government from the patrimonial monarchy to the class monarchy (monarchia stanowa). A related concept that evolved soon afterward was that of Rzeczpospolita, both of which served as the alternate names for the Polish state. The Crown of Poland was also related to other symbols of Poland, such as the capital ( Kraków ), Polish coat of arms and the flag of Poland. [ Geographical aspect ] The concept of Crown also had a geographical aspect, in particularly related to the indivisibility of the Polish (Crown) territory. It can be also seen as a unit of administrative division, the territories under direct administration of Polish state from middle-ages to late 18th century (currently lands of Ukraine, Poland, some border lands of inter alia: Russia, Belarus, Moldova, Slovakia, Romania ). Some of them belonged to the early Kingdom of Poland, then to Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth until its final collapse in 1795. At the same time, the Crown also referred to all lands that the Polish state (not the monarch) could claim to have the right to rule over, including those that were not within Polish borders. The term distinguishes those territories from federated with the Crown Grand Duchy of Lithuania ( [ plum ] ) and from fiefdom territories (which enjoyed varying degrees of autonomy or semi-independence from the King) inter alia the Duchy of Prussia ( [ lightpink ] ), the Duchy of Courland ( [ lightgrey ] ). Prior to the 1569 Union of Lublin, Crown territories may be understood as those of Poland proper, inhabited by Poles [ November 2009 ] or other areas under the sovereignty of Polish nobility. With the Union of Lublin, however, most of present-day Ukraine (which had a negligible Polish population and had until then been governed by Lithuania ) passed under Polish administration, becoming likewise Crown territory. In that period, a term for a Pole was koroniarz [ November 2009 ] (plural: koroniarze), derived from Korona. Depending on context, &quot; Crown &quot; may also refer to &quot; The Crown, &quot; a term used to distinguish the personal influence and private assets of the Commonwealth&apos;s current monarch from government authority and property. This often meant a distinction between persons loyal to the elected King (royalists) and persons loyal to the magnate s. [ Provinces ] Crown was divided into two province s : Lesser Poland (Polish: Małopolska) and Greater Poland (Polish: Wielkopolska) which were further divided into administrative units known as voivodeship s (Polish names of voivodships and towns below in brackets). [ Greater Poland Province ] [ Greater Poland Province of the Polish Crown ] Voivodeships of the Commonwealth of the Two Nations Map showing voivodeships of the Commonwealth of the Two Nations Brześć Kujawski Voivodeship (województwo brzesko-kujawskie, Brześć Kujawski ) Gniezno Voivodeship (województwo gnieźnieńskie, Gniezno ) from 1768 Inowrocław Voivodeship (województwo inowrocławskie, Inowrocław ) Kalisz Voivodeship (województwo kaliskie, Kalisz ) Łęczyca Voivodeship (województwo łęczyckie, Łęczyca ) Mazovian Voivodeship (województwo mazowieckie, of Mazowsze, Warsaw ) Poznań Voivodeship (województwo poznańskie, Poznań ) Płock Voivodeship (województwo płockie, Płock ) Podlaskie Voivodeship (województwo podlaskie, Drohiczyn ) Rawa Voivodeship (województwo rawskie, Rawa ) Sieradz Voivodeship (województwo sieradzkie, Sieradz ) Prince-Bishopric of Warmia [ Lesser Poland Province ] [ Lesser Poland Province of the Polish Crown ] Bełz Voivodeship (województwo bełzkie, Bełz ) Bracław Voivodeship (województwo bracławskie, Bracław ) Czernichów Voivodeship (województwo czernichowskie, Czernichów ) Kijów Voivodeship (województwo kijowskie, Kijów ) Kraków Voivodeship (województwo krakowskie, Kraków ) Lublin Voivodeship (województwo lubelskie, Lublin ) Podole Voivodeship (województwo podolskie, Kamieniec Podolski ) Ruś Voivodeship (województwo ruskie, Lwów ), divided into Sandomierz Voivodeship (województwo sandomierskie, Sandomierz ) Wołyń Voivodeship (województwo wołyńskie, Łuck ) Duchy of Siewierz ( Siewierz ) [ Royal Prussia Province (1569–1772) ] [ Royal Prussia ] Royal Prussia [ Prusy Królewskie ] ) was a province of the Kingdom of Poland from 1466 and then the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth from 1569 to 1772. Royal Prussia included Pomerelia, Chełmno Land (Kulmerland), Malbork Voivodeship (Marienburg), Gdańsk (Danzig), Toruń (Thorn), and Elbląg (Elbing). [ Towns in Spisz County (1412–1795) ] As one of the terms of the Treaty of Lubowla, the Hungarian crown exchanged, for a loan of sixty times the amount of 37,000 Prague groschen – approximately seven tonnes of pure silver, 16 rich salt-producing towns in the area of Spisz (Zips), as well as a right to incorporate them into Poland until the debt is repaid. The towns affected were: Biała, Lubica, Wierzbów, Spiska Sobota, Poprad, Straże, Spiskie Włochy, Nowa Wieś, Spiska Nowa Wieś, Ruszkinowce, Wielka, Spiskie Podgrodzie, Maciejowce, Twarożne. [ References ] [ See also ] Administrative division of the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth Lands of the Crown of Saint Stephen Lands of the Crown of Saint Wenceslaus [ Poland ] Category:History of Poland (1569–1795) Category:Historical regions in Poland cs:Koruna polského království it:Corona del Regno di Polonia nl:Kroon van het Poolse Koninkrijk pl:Korona Królestwa Polskiego pt:Coroa do Reino da Polônia ru:Корона Королевства Польского uk:Корона Королівства Польського zh:波兰王国王冠领地