[ July 2011 ] { Peter Paul Rubens } { Sant&apos;Andrea al Quirinale, designed by } { Gian Lorenzo Bernini } The Baroque is a period of artistic style that used exaggerated motion and clear, easily interpreted detail to produce drama, tension, exuberance, and grandeur in sculpture, painting, architecture, literature, dance, and music. The style started around 1600 in Rome, Italy and spread to most of Europe. [ Paul Fargis The New York Public Library Desk Reference 1998 third New York Macmillan General Reference 262 0-02-862169-7 ] The popularity and success of the Baroque style was encouraged by the Roman Catholic Church, which had decided at the time of the Council of Trent, in response to the Protestant Reformation, that the arts should communicate religious themes in direct and emotional involvement. { Helen Gardner, Fred S. Kleiner, and Christin J. Mamiya, Gardner&apos;s Art Through the Ages (Belmont, CA: Thomson/Wadsworth, 2005), p. 516. } The aristocracy also saw the dramatic style of Baroque architecture and art as a means of impressing visitors and expressing triumphant power and control. Baroque palaces are built around an entrance of courts, grand staircases and reception rooms of sequentially increasing opulence. [ Etymology ] According to the Oxford English Dictionary, the word baroque is derived from the Portuguese word &quot; barroco &quot;, Spanish &quot; barroco &quot;, or French &quot; baroque &quot;, all of which refer to a &quot; rough or imperfect pearl &quot;, though whether it entered those languages via Latin, Arabic, or some other source is uncertain. { OED Online. Accessed 6 June 2008. } The 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica 11th edition, thought the term was derived from the Spanish barrueco, a large, irregularly-shaped pearl, and it was for a time confined to the craft of the jeweller. [ http://www.theodora.com/encyclopedia/b/baroque.html Baroque Encyclopædia Britannica 1911 20 April 2011 ] Others derive it from the mnemonic term &quot; Baroco &quot;, a supposedly laboured form of syllogism in logical Scholastica. [ Panofsky Erwin What is Baroque? Three Essays on Style The MIT Press 1995 19 harv ] {. } In informal usage, the word baroque can simply mean that something is &quot; elaborate &quot;, with many details, without reference to the Baroque styles of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. The word &quot; Baroque &quot;, like most periodic or stylistic designations, was invented by later critics rather than practitioners of the arts in the 17th and early 18th centuries. It is a French transliteration of the Portuguese phrase &quot; pérola barroca &quot;, which means &quot; irregular pearl &quot;, and natural pearls that deviate from the usual, regular forms so they do not have an axis of rotation are known as &quot; baroque pearls &quot;. [ April 2011 ] The term &quot; Baroque &quot; was initially used with a derogatory meaning, to underline the excesses of its emphasis. In particular, the term was used to describe its eccentric redundancy and noisy abundance of details, which sharply contrasted the clear and sober rationality of the Renaissance. Although it was long thought that the word as a critical term was first applied to architecture, in fact it appears earlier in reference to music, in an anonymous, satirical review of the première in October 1733 of Jean-Philippe Rameau ’s Hippolyte et Aricie, printed in the Mercure de France in May 1734. The critic implied that the novelty in this opera was &quot; du barocque &quot;, complaining that the music lacked coherent melody, was filled with unremitting dissonances, constantly changed key and meter, and speedily ran through every compositional device. { Claude V. Palisca, &quot; Baroque &quot;. The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians, second edition, edited by } { Stanley Sadie and } { John Tyrrell (London: Macmillan Publishers, 2001). } [ Modern usage ] In modern usage, the term &quot; Baroque &quot; may still be used, usually pejoratively, describing works of art, craft, or design that are thought to have excessive ornamentation or complexity of line, or, as a synonym for &quot; Byzantine &quot;, to describe literature, computer software, contracts, or laws that are thought to be excessively complex, indirect, or obscure in language, to the extent of concealing or confusing their meaning. The word was first rehabilitated by the Swiss-born art historian, Heinrich Wölfflin (1864 –1945) in his Renaissance und Barock (1888); Wölfflin identified the Baroque as &quot; movement imported into mass, &quot; an art antithetic to Renaissance art. He did not make the distinctions between Mannerism and Baroque that modern writers do, and he ignored the later phase, the academic Baroque that lasted into the 18th century. Writers in French and English did not begin to treat Baroque as a respectable study until Wölfflin&apos;s influence had made German scholarship pre-eminent. [ April 2011 ] [ Development ] { Federico Barocci, 1598 } The Baroque originated around 1600, the Council of Trent (1545 –63), by which the Roman Catholic Church answered many questions of internal reform, addressed the representational arts by demanding that paintings and sculptures in church contexts should speak to the illiterate rather than to the well-informed. This turn toward a populist conception of the function of ecclesiastical art is seen by many art historians as driving the innovations of Caravaggio and the Carracci brothers, all of who were working (and competing for commissions) in Rome around 1600. The appeal of Baroque style turned consciously from the witty, intellectual qualities of 16th century Mannerist art to a visceral appeal aimed at the senses. It employed an iconography that was direct, simple, obvious, and theatrical (illustration, right). Baroque art drew on certain broad and heroic tendencies in Annibale Caracci and his circle, and found inspiration in other artists like Correggio and Caravaggio and Federico Barocci (illustration, left), nowadays sometimes termed &apos;proto-Baroque&apos;. Germinal ideas of the Baroque can also be found in the work of Michelangelo. Some general parallels in music make the expression &quot; Baroque music &quot; useful: there are contrasting phrase lengths, harmony and counterpoint have ousted polyphony, and orchestral color makes a stronger appearance. Even more generalized parallels perceived by some experts in philosophy, prose style and poetry, are harder to pinpoint. Though Baroque was superseded in many centers by the Rococo style, beginning in France in the late 1720s, especially for interiors, paintings and the decorative arts, the Baroque style continued to be used in architecture until the advent of Neoclassicism in the later 18th century. See the Neapolitan palace of Caserta, a Baroque palace (though in a chaste exterior) whose construction began 1752. In paintings Baroque gestures are broader than Mannerist gestures: less ambiguous, less arcane and mysterious, more like the stage gestures of opera, a major Baroque art form. Baroque poses depend on contrapposto ( &quot; counterpoise &quot; ), the tension within the figures that move the planes of shoulders and hips in counterdirections. See Benini&apos;s David. The dryer, less dramatic and coloristic, chastened later stages of 18th century Baroque architectural style are often seen as a separate Late Baroque manifestation, for example in buildings by Claude Perrault. Academic characteristics in the neo- Palladian style, epitomized by William Kent, are a parallel development in Britain and the British colonies: within interiors, Kent&apos;s furniture designs are vividly influenced by the Baroque furniture of Rome and Genoa, hierarchical tectonic sculptural elements, meant never to be moved from their positions, completed the wall decoration. Baroque is a style of unity imposed upon rich, heavy detail. The Baroque was defined by Heinrich W &amp; ouml;lfflin as the age where the oval replaced the circle as the center of composition, that centralization replaced balance, and that coloristic and &quot; painterly &quot; effects began to become more prominent.Art historians, often Protestant ones, have traditionally emphasized that the Baroque style evolved during a time in which the Roman Catholic Church had to react against the many revolutionary cultural movements that produced a new science and new forms of religion — Reformation. It has been said that the monumental Baroque is a style that could give the Papacy, like secular absolute monarchies, a formal, imposing way of expression that could restore its prestige, at the point of becoming somehow symbolic of the Counter-Reformation. Whether this is the case or not, it was successfully developed in Rome, where Baroque architecture widely renewed the central areas with perhaps the most important urbanistic revision. [ Painting ] { Josefa de Óbidos, c.1679, } { Santarém, Portugal, Municipal Library } [ Baroque painting ] A defining statement of what Baroque signifies in painting is provided by the series of paintings executed by Peter Paul Rubens for Marie de Medici at the Luxembourg Palace in Paris (now at the Louvre ), { Peter Paul Rubens &apos;&apos;The Life of Marie de&apos; Medici&apos;&apos;. } in which a Catholic painter satisfied a Catholic patron: Baroque-era conceptions of monarchy, iconography, handling of paint, and compositions as well as the depiction of space and movement. Baroque style featured &quot; exaggerated lighting, intense emotions, release from restraint, and even a kind of artistic sensationalism &quot;. Baroque art did not really depict the life style of the people at that time; however, &quot; closely tied to the Counter-Reformation, this style melodramatically reaffirmed the emotional depths of the Catholic faith and glorified both church and monarchy &quot; of their power and influence. { Hunt, Martin, Rosenwein, and Smith (2010). The Making of the West (third ed.). Boston: Bedford/ St. Martin&apos;s. pp. 469 } There were highly diverse strands of Italian baroque painting, from Caravaggio to Cortona; both approaching emotive dynamism with different styles. Another frequently cited work of Baroque art is Bernini &apos;s Saint Theresa in Ecstasy for the Cornaro chapel in Saint Maria della Vittoria, which brings together architecture, sculpture, and theatre into one grand conceit. { &quot; Cornaro Chapel &quot; at Bogelwood.com. } The later Baroque style gradually gave way to a more decorative Rococo. A rather different art developed out of northern realist traditions in 17th century Dutch Golden Age painting, which had very little religious art, and little history painting, instead playing a crucial part in developing secular genres such as still life, genre painting s of everyday scenes, and landscape painting. While the Baroque nature of Rembrandt &apos;s art is clear, the label is less often used for Vermeer and many other Dutch artists. Flemish Baroque painting shared a part in this trend, while also continuing to produce the traditional categories. [ Sculpture ] [ Baroque sculpture ] In Baroque sculpture, groups of figures assumed new importance and there was a dynamic movement and energy of human forms— they spiraled around an empty central vortex, or reached outwards into the surrounding space. For the first time, Baroque sculpture often had multiple ideal viewing angles. The characteristic Baroque sculpture added extra-sculptural elements, for example, concealed lighting, or water fountains. Aleijadinho in Brazil was also one of the great names of baroque sculpture, and his master work is the set of statues of the Santuário de Bom Jesus de Matosinhos in Congonhas. The soapstone sculptures of old testament prophets around the terrace are considered amongst his finest work. The architecture, sculpture and fountains of Bernini (1598 –1680) give highly charged characteristics of Baroque style. Bernini was undoubtedly the most important sculptor of the Baroque period. He approached Michelangelo in his omnicompetence: Bernini sculpted, worked as an architect, painted, wrote plays, and staged spectacles. In the late 20th century Bernini was most valued for his sculpture, both for his virtuosity in carving marble and his ability to create figures that combine the physical and the spiritual. He was also a fine sculptor of bust portraits in high demand among the powerful. [ Bernini&apos;s Cornaro chapel: the complete work of art ] A good example of Bernini&apos;s Baroque work is his St. Theresa in Ecstasy (1645 –52), created for the Cornaro Chapel of the church of Santa Maria della Vittoria, Rome. Bernini designed the entire chapel, a subsidiary space along the side of the church, for the Cornaro family. { Bernini &apos;s &apos;&apos; } { Ecstasy of St. Teresa &apos;&apos; } Saint Theresa, the focal point of the chapel, is a soft white marble statue surrounded by a polychromatic marble architectural framing. This structure works to conceal a window which lights the statue from above. In shallow relief, sculpted figure-groups of the Cornaro family inhabit in opera boxes along the two side walls of the chapel. The setting places the viewer as a spectator in front of the statue with the Cornaro family leaning out of their box seats and craning forward to see the mystical ecstasy of the saint. St. Theresa is highly idealized and in an imaginary setting. St. Theresa of Avila, a popular saint of the Catholic Reformation, wrote of her mystical experiences aimed at the nuns of her Carmelite Order; these writings had become popular reading among lay people interested in pursuing spirituality. In her writings, she described the love of God as piercing her heart like a burning arrow. Bernini literalizes this image by placing St. Theresa on a cloud while a Cupid figure holds a golden arrow (the arrow is made of metal) and smiles down at her. The angelic figure is not preparing to plunge the arrow into her heart— rather, he has withdrawn it. St. Theresa&apos;s face reflects not the anticipation of ecstasy, but her current fulfillment. This is widely considered the genius of Baroque, although this mix of religious and erotic imagery was extremely offensive in the context of neoclassical restraint. However, Bernini was a devout Catholic and was not attempting to satirize the experience of a chaste nun. Rather, he aimed to portray religious experience as an intensely physical one. Theresa described her bodily reaction to spiritual enlightenment in a language of ecstasy used by many mystics, and Bernini&apos;s depiction is earnest. The Cornaro family promotes itself discreetly in this chapel; they are represented visually, but are placed on the sides of the chapel, witnessing the event from balconies. As in an opera house, the Cornaro have a privileged position in respect to the viewer, in their private reserve, closer to the saint; the viewer, however, has a better view from the front. They attach their name to the chapel, but St. Theresa is the focus. It is a private chapel in the sense that no one could say mass on the altar beneath the statue (in 17th century and probably through the 19th) without permission from the family, but the only thing that divides the viewer from the image is the altar rail. The spectacle functions both as a demonstration of mysticism and as a piece of family pride. [ Architecture ] { Augustusburg Palace near } { Cologne } { Trevi Fountain in Rome } [ Baroque architecture ] In Baroque architecture, new emphasis was placed on bold massing, colonnade s, dome s, light-and-shade ( chiaroscuro ), &apos;painterly&apos; color effects, and the bold play of volume and void. In interiors, Baroque movement around and through a void informed monumental staircases that had no parallel in previous architecture. The other Baroque innovation in worldly interiors was the state apartment, a processional sequence of increasingly rich interiors that culminated in a presence chamber or throne room or a state bedroom. The sequence of monumental stairs followed by a state apartment was copied in smaller scale everywhere in aristocratic dwellings of any pretensions. Baroque architecture was taken up with enthusiasm in central Germany (see, e.g., Ludwigsburg Palace and Zwinger Dresden), Austria and Russia (see, e.g., Peterhof ). In England the culmination of Baroque architecture was embodied in work by Sir Christopher Wren, Sir John Vanbrugh and Nicholas Hawksmoor, from ca. 1660 to ca. 1725. Many examples of Baroque architecture and town planning are found in other European towns, and in Latin America. Town planning of this period featured radiating avenues intersecting in squares, which took cues from Baroque garden plans. In Sicily, Baroque developed new shapes and themes as in Noto, Ragusa and Acireale &quot; Basilica di San Sebastiano &quot;. Another example of Baroque architecture is the Cathedral of Morelia Michoacan in Mexico. Built in the 17th century by Vincenzo Barrochio, it is one of the many Baroque cathedrals in Mexico. Francis Ching described Baroque architecture as &quot; a style of architecture originating in Italy in the early 17th century and variously prevalent in Europe and the New World for a century and a half, characterized by free and sculptural use of the classical orders and ornament, dynamic opposition and interpenetration of spaces, and the dramatic combined effects of architecture, sculpture, painting, and the decorative arts. &quot; { Francis DK Ching, A Visual Dictionary of Architecture, p.  133 } [ Theatre ] In theatre, the elaborate conceits, multiplicity of plot turns, and variety of situations characteristic of Mannerism ( Shakespeare&apos;s tragedies, for instance) were superseded by opera, which drew together all the arts into a unified whole. Theatre evolved in the Baroque era and became a multimedia experience, starting with the actual architectural space. In fact, much of the technology used in current Broadway or commercial plays was invented and developed during this era. The stage could change from a romantic garden to the interior of a palace in a matter of seconds. The entire space became a framed selected area that only allows the users to see a specific action, hiding all the machinery and technology – mostly ropes and pulleys. This technology affected the content of the narrated or performed pieces, practicing at its best the Deus ex Machina solution. Gods were finally able to come down – literally – from the heavens and rescue the hero in the most extreme and dangerous, even absurd situations. The term Theatrum Mundi – the world is a stage – was also created. The social and political realm in the real world is manipulated in exactly the same way the actor and the machines are presenting/limiting what is being presented on stage, hiding selectively all the machinery that makes the actions happen. The films Vatel, Farinelli, and the staging of Monteverdi &apos;s Orpheus at the Gran Teatre del Liceu in Barcelona, give a good idea of the style of productions of the Baroque period. The American musician William Christie and Les Arts Florissants have performed extensive research on all the French Baroque Opera, performing pieces from Charpentier and Lully, among others that are extremely faithful to the original 17th century creations. [ Literature and philosophy ] [ 17th century in literature 17th century philosophy Early Modern literature ] Baroque actually expressed new values, which often are summarized in the use of metaphor and allegory, widely found in Baroque literature, and in the research for the &quot; maraviglia &quot; (wonder, astonishment – as in Marinism ), the use of artifices. The psychological pain of Man – a theme disbanded after the Copernican and the Lutheran revolutions in search of solid anchors, a proof of an &quot; ultimate human power &quot; – was to be found in both the art and architecture of the Baroque period. Virtuosity was researched by artists (and the virtuoso became a common figure in any art) together with realism and care for details (some talk of a typical &quot; intricacy &quot; ). [ July 2009 ] The privilege given to external forms had to compensate and balance the lack of content that has been observed in many Baroque works: Marino &apos;s &quot; Maraviglia &quot;, for example, is practically made of the pure, mere form. Fantasy and imagination should be evoked in the spectator, in the reader, in the listener. All was focused around the individual Man, as a straight relationship between the artist, or directly the art and its user, its client. Art is then less distant from user, more directly approaching him, solving the cultural gap that used to keep art and user reciprocally far, by Maraviglia. [ July 2009 ] But the increased attention to the individual, also created in these schemes some important genres like the Romanzo (novel) and allowed popular or local forms of art, especially dialectal literature, to be put into evidence. In Italy this movement toward the single individual (that some define a &quot; cultural descent &quot;, while others indicate it as a possible cause for the classical opposition to Baroque) caused Latin to be definitely replaced by Italian. [ July 2009 ] In Spain, the baroque writers are framed in the &apos;&apos;Siglo de Oro&apos;&apos;. Naturalism and sharply critical points of view on Spanish society are common among such conceptista writers as Quevedo, while culterano authors emphasize the importance of form with complicated images and the use of hyperbaton. In Catalonia the baroque took hold as well in Catalan language, with representatives including poets and dramaturgs such as Francesc Fontanella and Francesc Vicenç Garcia as well as the unique emblem book Atheneo de Grandesa by Josep Romaguera. In Colonial Spanish America some of the best-known baroque writers were Sor Juana and Bernardo de Balbuena, in Mexico, and Juan de Espinosa Medrano and Juan del Valle y Caviedes, in Peru. [ July 2009 ] In the Portuguese Empire the most famous baroque writer of the time was Father António Vieira, a Jesuit who lived in Brazil during the 18th century. Secondary writers are Gregório de Matos and Francisco Rodrigues Lobo. [ July 2009 ] In English literature, the metaphysical poets represent a closely related movement; their poetry likewise sought unusual metaphors, which they then examined in often extensive detail. Their verse also manifests a taste for paradox, and deliberately inventive and unusual turns of phrase. [ July 2009 ] For German Baroque literature, see German literature of the Baroque period. [ Music ] [ Baroque music ] { George Frideric Handel, 1733 } { Johann Sebastian Bach, 1748 } The term Baroque is also used to designate the style of music composed during a period that overlaps with that of Baroque art, but usually encompasses a slightly later period. It is a still-debated question as to what extent Baroque music shares aesthetic principles with the visual and literary arts of the Baroque period. A fairly clear, shared element is a love of ornamentation, and it is perhaps significant that the role of ornament was greatly diminished in both music and architecture as the Baroque gave way to the Classical period. It should be noted that the application of the term &quot; Baroque &quot; to music is a relatively recent development. The first use of the word &quot; Baroque &quot; in music was only in 1919, by Curt Sachs, [ Sachs Curt Curt Sachs Barockmusik Baroque Music Jahrbuch der Musikbibliothek Peters 26 1919 Edition Peters Leipzig Deutsch 7–15 ] and it was not until 1940 that it was first used in English (in an article published by Manfred Bukofzer ). [ Palisca Claude V. Baroque Music 3rd Prentice Hall History of Music 1991 1961 Prentice Hall Englewood Cliffs, N.J. 0-13-058496-7 318382784 ] Many musical forms were born in that era, like the concerto and sinfonia. Forms such as the sonata, cantata and oratorio flourished. Also, opera was born out of the experimentation of the Florentine Camerata, the creators of monody, who attempted to recreate the theatrical arts of the Ancient Greeks. An important technique used in baroque music was the use of ground bass, a repeated bass line. Dido&apos;s Lament by Henry Purcell is a famous example of this technique. [ Composers and examples ] Claudio Monteverdi (1567 –1643), L&apos;Orfeo, favola in musica (1610) Heinrich Schütz (1585 –1672), Symphoniae Sacrae (1629, 1647, 1650) Jean-Baptiste Lully (1632 –1687), Armide (1686) Heinrich Ignaz Franz Biber (1644 –1704), Mystery Sonatas (1681) John Blow (1649 –1708), Venus and Adonis (1680–1687) Johann Pachelbel (1653 –1706), Canon in D (1680) Arcangelo Corelli (1653 –1713), 12 concerti grossi Henry Purcell (1659 –1695), Dido and Aeneas (1687) Tomaso Albinoni (1671 –1751), Sonata a sei con tromba Antonio Vivaldi (1678 –1741), The Four Seasons Johann David Heinichen (1683 –1729) Jean-Philippe Rameau (1683 –1764), Dardanus (1739) George Frideric Handel (1685 –1759), Water Music Suite (1717) Domenico Scarlatti (1685 –1757), Sonatas for Cembalo or Harpsichord Johann Sebastian Bach (1685 –1750), Brandenburgische Konzerte (1721) Georg Philipp Telemann (1681 –1767), Der Tag des Gerichts (1762) Giovanni Battista Pergolesi (1710 –1736), Stabat Mater (1736) [ See also ] Gilded woodcarving Neo-baroque Dutch Baroque architecture English Baroque French Baroque Italian Baroque Naryshkin Baroque Petrine Baroque Polish Baroque Baroque in Portugal Sicilian Baroque Spanish Baroque architecture Ukrainian Baroque List of Baroque architecture [ References ] [ 30em ] [ Bibliography ] Andersen, Liselotte. 1969. &quot; Baroque and Rococo Art &quot;, New York: H. N. Abrams. Buci-Glucksmann, Christine. 1994. Baroque Reason: The Aesthetics of Modernity. Sage. Gardner, Helen, Fred S. Kleiner, and Christin J. Mamiya. 2005. Gardner&apos;s Art through the Ages, 12th edition. Belmont, CA: Thomson/Wadsworth. ISBN 978-0-15-505090-7 (hardcover) ISBN 978-0-534-64095-8 (v. 1, pbk.) 0534640915 ISBN 978-0-534-64091-0 (v. 2, pbk.) ISBN 978-0-534-64081-1 (CD-ROM) ISBN 978-0-534-64100-9 (Resource Guide) ISBN 978-0-534-64108-5 (set) 0534641075 ISBN 978-0-534-64107-8 (v. 1, international student ed., pbk.) ISBN 978-0-534-63331-8 (cd-ROM) Wakefield, Steve. 2004. Carpentier&apos;s Baroque Fiction: Returning Medusa&apos;s Gaze. Colección Támesis. Serie A, Monografías 208. Rochester, NY: Tamesis. ISBN 1-85566-107-1. [ Further reading ] [ 2 ] Bazin, Germain, 1964. Baroque and Rococo. Praeger World of Art Series. New York: Praeger. (Originally published in French, as Classique, baroque et rococo. Paris: Larousse. English edition reprinted as Baroque and Rococo Art, New York: Praeger, 1974) Kitson, Michael. 1966. The Age of Baroque. Landmarks of the World&apos;s Art. London: Hamlyn; New York: McGraw-Hill. Lambert, Gregg, 2004. Return of the Baroque in Modern Culture. Continuum. ISBN 978-0-8264-6648-8. Martin, John Rupert. 1977. Baroque. Icon Editions. New York: Harper and Rowe. ISBN 0-06-435332-X (cloth); ISBN 0-06-430077-3 (pbk.) Wölfflin, Heinrich. 1964. Renaissance and Baroque (Reprinted 1984; originally published in German, 1888) The classic study. ISBN 0-8014-9046-4 [ External links ] [ Baroque art ] [ Victoria and Albert Museum http://www.vam.ac.uk/vastatic/microsites/british_galleries/bg_styles/Style03b/index.html Baroque Style Guide British Galleries 16 July 2007 ] The baroque and rococo culture &quot; Dictionary of the History of Ideas &quot; : Baroque in literature The greatest works of Baroque literature Webmuseum Paris barocke in Val di Noto – Sizilien Baroque in the &quot; History of Art &quot; On Baroque Symbolism The Baroque style and Luis XIV influence Melvyn Bragg&apos;s BBC4 radio program &apos;&apos;In Our Time&apos;&apos;: The Baroque Category:Italian art Category:Baroque [ sk ] [ ja ] af:Barok als:Barock ar:باروكية an:Barroco zh-min-nan:Baroque be:Барока be-x-old:Барока bg:Барок bar:Barock bs:Barok ca:Barroc cs:Baroko cy:Baróc da:Barokken de:Barock et:Barokk el:Μπαρόκ es:Barroco eo:Baroko ext:Barrocu eu:Barrokoa fa:باروک fo:Barokkur fr:Baroque fy:Barok (stylperioade) gl:Barroco gan:巴洛克式 ko:바로크 hi:बरॉक hsb:Barok hr:Barok id:Barok is:Barokk it:Barocco he:בארוק jv:Barok kn:ಬರೊಕ್‌ ka:ბაროკო ku:Barok la:Barocus lv:Baroks lb:Barock lt:Barokas li:Barok hu:Barokk mk:Барок arz:باروك ms:Baroque nl:Barok (stijlperiode) nds-nl:Barok ja:バロック no:Barokken nn:Barokken oc:Barròc pnb:بیرک nds:Barock pl:Barok pt:Barroco ro:Baroc rue:Бароко ru:Барокко stq:Barock scn:Baroccu simple:Baroque sk:Barok sl:Barok sr:Барок sh:Barok fi:Barokki sv:Barocken th:บารอก tr:Barok uk:Бароко vi:Baroque vls:Barok zh:巴洛克艺术