The Philokalia ( Gk. φιλοκαλία, &quot; love of the beautiful &quot; ) is &quot; a collection of texts written between the 4th and 15th centuries by spiritual masters &quot; [ Ware, Kallistos; Sherrard, Philip The Philokalia: the complete text Faber London 1979 10 0-571-13013-5 http://books.google.com/books?id%3D8ViqQ6qYSjIC%26amp%3Bpg%3DPA10 ] of the Eastern Orthodox hesychast tradition. They were originally written for the guidance and instruction of monks in &quot; the practise of the contemplative life &quot;. { Ware (1979), pp. 14-15. } The collection was compiled in the eighteenth-century by St. Nikodemos of the Holy Mountain and St. Makarios of Corinth. Although these works were individually known in the monastic culture of Greek Orthodox Christianity before their inclusion in The Philokalia, their presence in this collection resulted in a much wider readership due to its translation into several languages. The earliest translations included a Church Slavonic translation of selected texts by Paisius Velichkovsky (Dobrotolublye) in 1793, a Russian translation by Ignatius Bryanchaninov in 1857, and a five-volume translation into Russian (Dobrotolyubie) by St. Theophan the Recluse in 1877. There were subsequent Romanian, Italian and French translations. { Ware (1979), pp. 11-12. } [ Johnson Christopher D. L. The Globalization of Hesychasm and the Jesus Prayer Continuum International Publishing Group Continuum Advances in Religious Studies 2010 39 978-1-4411-2547-7 http://books.google.com/books?id%3DuN2vBZdGXwAC%26amp%3Bpg%3DPA39 ] The book is a &quot; principal spiritual text &quot; for all the Eastern Orthodox Churches; [ Palmer, G. E. H.; Ware, Kallistos; Allyne Smith; Sherrard, Philip The Philokalia: The Eastern Christian Spiritual Texts—selections Annotated &amp; Explained (SkyLight Illuminations) Skylight Paths Publishing 2006 vii–xiv 1-59473-103-9 http://books.google.com/books?id%3Dk9e_9dXUqpQC%26amp%3Bpg%3DPR7 ] the publishers of the current English translation state that &quot; The Philokalia has exercised an influence far greater than that of any book other than the Bible in the recent history of the Orthodox Church. &quot; { Ware (1979), Publisher&apos;s blurb from back cover. } Philokalia (sometimes Philocalia) is also the name given to an anthology of the writings of Origen compiled by Saint Basil the Great and Saint Gregory Nazianzus. Other works on monastic spirituality have also used the same title over the years. { English translation online here } [ History ] Nikodemos and Makarios were monks at Mt. Athos, a mountain in northern Greece historically considered the geographical center of Orthodox spirituality and home to many monasteries. The first edition, in Greek, was published in Venice in 1782, with a second Greek edition published in Athens in 1893. All the original texts were in Greek—two of them were first written in Latin and translated into Greek in the Byzantine era. Paisius Velichkovsky &apos;s translation into Church Slavonic, Dobrotolublye (published in Moscow in 1793), included selected portions of The Philokalia, and was the version that the pilgrim in The Way of a Pilgrim carried on his journey. That book about a Russian pilgrim who is seeking advice on interior prayer helped popularize The Philokalia and its teachings in Russia. Velichkovsky&apos;s translation was the first to become widely read by the public, away from the monasteries—helped by the popularity of The Way of a Pilgrim, and the public influence of the startsy at Optina Monastery known as the Optina Elders. Two Russian language translations appeared in the 19th century, by Ignatius Brianchaninov (1857) and Theophan the Recluse &apos;s Dobrotolubiye (1877). The latter was published in five volumes, and included texts that were not in the original Greek edition. [ Witte, John F.; Alexander, Frank S. The teachings of modern Orthodox Christianity on law, politics, and human nature Columbia University Press New York 2007 6 0-231-14265-X http://books.google.com/books?id%3DTHpyJ0jBeH0C%26amp%3Bpg%3DPA6 ] Velichkovsky was initially hesitant to share his translation outside of the Optina Monastery walls. He was concerned that people living in the world would not have the adequate supervision and guidance of the startsy in the monastery, nor would they have the support of the liturgical life of the monks. He was finally persuaded by the Metropolitan of St. Petersburg to publish the book in 1793. Brianchanivov expressed the same concerns in his work, warning his readers that regular practice of the Jesus Prayer, without adequate guidance, could potentially cause spiritual delusion and pride, even among monks. Their concerns were contrary to the original compiler of The Philokalia, Nicodemos, who wrote that the Jesus Prayer could be used to good effect by anyone, whether monastic or layperson. All agreed that the teachings on constant inner prayer should be practiced under the guidance of a spiritual teacher, or starets. { Johnson (2010), p. 38. } The first partial English and French translations in the 1950s were an indirect result of the Bolshevik revolution, which brought many Russian intellectuals into Western Europe. T. S. Eliot persuaded his fellow directors of the publishing house Faber and Faber to publish a partial translation into English from the Theophan Russian version, which met with surprising success in 1951. A more complete English translation, from the original Greek, began in 1979 with a collaboration between G. E. H. Palmer, Kallistos Ware, and Philip Sherrard. They released four of the five volumes of The Philokalia between 1979 and 1995. [ Ware Kallistos The Monastic Magnet: Roads to and from Mount Athos René Gothóni, Graham Speake Peter Lang 2008 148-149 978-3-03911-337-8 http://books.google.com/books?id%3DxKsL6gpDJwEC%26amp%3Bpg%3DPA148 ] Writings by the Trappist monk Thomas Merton on hesychasm also helped spread the popularity of The Philokalia, along with the indirect influence of J. D. Salinger &apos;s Franny and Zooey, which featured The Way of a Pilgrim as a main plot element. { Johnson (2010), pp. 41-42. } [ Teachings ] The collection&apos;s title is The Philokalia of the Niptic Fathers, { Ware (1979) pp. 367-368 } or more fully The Philokalia of the Neptic Saints gathered from our Holy Theophoric Father, through which, by means of the philosophy of ascetic practice and contemplation, the intellect is purified, illumined, and made perfect. Niptic is an adjective derived from the Greek Nipsis (or Nepsis ) referring to contemplative prayer and meaning &quot; watchfulness &quot;. Watchfulness in this context includes close attention to one&apos;s thoughts, intentions, and emotions, with the aim of resisting temptations and vain and egoistic thoughts, and trying to maintain a constant state of remembrance of God. There are similarities between this ancient practice and the concept of mindfulness as practiced in Buddhism and other spiritual traditions. [ Dowd E. Thomas Stevan Lars Nielsen The Psychologies in Religion Springer Publishing Company 2006 55 978-0-8261-2856-0 http://books.google.com/books?id%3DgXQHUAn_GpcC%26amp%3Bpg%3DPA55 ] [ Braud, William; Anderson, Rosemarie Transpersonal research methods for the social sciences: honoring human experience Sage Publications Thousand Oaks 1998 243 0-7619-1013-1 http://books.google.com/books?id%3D9xJpOxsLRXcC%26amp%3Bpg%3DPA243 ] The Philokalia teachings have also influenced the revival of interior prayer in modern times through the centering prayer practices taught by Thomas Keating and Thomas Merton. [ Palmer G. E. H. Allyne Smith Philokalia: the Eastern Christian spiritual texts SkyLight Paths Publishing 2006 14 978-1-59473-103-7 http://books.google.com/books?id%3Dk9e_9dXUqpQC%26amp%3Bpg%3DPR14 ] Philokalia is defined as the &quot; love of the beautiful, the exalted, the excellent, understood as the transcendent source of life and the revelation of Truth. &quot; { Ware (1979), p. 13. } In contemplative prayer the mind becomes absorbed in the awareness of God as a living presence as the source of being of all creatures and sensible forms. According to the authors of the English translation, Kallistos Ware, G. E. H. Palmer, and Philip Sherrard, the writings of The Philokalia have been chosen above others because they:...show the way to awaken and develop attention and consciousness, to attain that state of watchfulness which is the hallmark of sanctity. They describe the conditions most effective for learning what their authors call the art of arts and the science of sciences, a learning which is not a matter of information or agility of mind but of a radical change of will and heart leading man towards the highest possibilities open to him, shaping and nourishing the unseen part of his being, and helping him to spiritual fulfilment and union with God. &quot; The Philokalia is the foundational text on hesychasm ( &quot; quietness &quot; ), an inner spiritual tradition with a long history dating back to the Desert Fathers. The practices include contemplative prayer, quiet sitting, and recitation of the Jesus Prayer. While traditionally taught and practiced in monasteries, hesychasm teachings have spread over the years to include laymen. Nikodemos, in his introduction, described the collected texts as &quot; a mystical school of inward prayer &quot; which could be used to cultivate the inner life and to &quot; attain the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. &quot; While the monastic life makes this easier, Nikodemos himself stressed that &quot; unceasing prayer &quot; should be practiced by all. The hesychasm teachings in the Philokalia are viewed by Orthodox Christians as inseparable from the sacraments and liturgy of the Orthodox Church, and are given by and for those who are already living within the framework of the Church. A common theme is the need for a spiritual father or guide. { Ware (1979), p. 16. } [ Timeline of editions and translations ] 4th-15th centuries The original texts are written by various spiritual masters. Most are written in Greek, two are written in Latin and translated into Greek during Byzantine times. 1782 First edition, Greek, published in Venice, compiled by Nikodemos and Makarios. 1793 Church Slavonic translation of selected texts, Dobrotolublye, by Paisius Velichkovsky, published in Moscow. This translation was carried by the pilgrim in The Way of a Pilgrim. First to be read outside of monasteries, with a strong influence on the two following Russian translations. 1857 Russian language translation, by Ignatius Brianchaninov. 1877 Russian language translation, by Theophan the Recluse, included several texts not in the Greek original, and omitted or paraphrased some passages. 1893 Second Greek edition, published in Athens, included additional texts by Patriarch Kallistos. 1946-1976 Romanian translation by Father Dumitru Stăniloae, in five volumes, included additional material. 1951, 1954 First partial English translations by E. Kadloubovsky and G. E. H. Palmer in two volumes: Writings from the Philokalia on Prayer of the Heart and Early Fathers from the Philokalia. These were translated from Theophane&apos;s Russian version, and published by Faber and Faber. 1957-1963 Third Greek edition, published in Athens by Astir Publishing Company in five volumes. Modern English translation based on this edition. 1979-1995 English translation by Kallistos Ware, G. E. H. Palmer, and Philip Sherrard, of the first four of the five Greek volumes, from the Third Greek edition. This was published by Faber and Faber. [ Contents ] This listing of texts is based on the English translation of four volumes by Bishop Kallistos Ware, G. E. H. Palmer, and Philip Sherrard. The fifth volume has yet to be published in English. Some works in the Philokalia are also found in the Patrologia Graecae and Patrologia Latina of J. P. Migne. [ February 2011 ] [ Volume 1 ] St. Isaiah the Solitary On Guarding the Intellect: 27 Texts Evagrius the Solitary Outline Teaching on Asceticism and Stillness in the Solitary Texts on Discrimination in respect of Passions and Thoughts Extracts from the Texts on Watchfulness On Prayer: 153 Texts St. John Cassian On the Eight Vices On the Holy Fathers of Sketis and on Discrimination St. Mark the Ascetic On the Spiritual Law: 200 Texts On Those who Think that They are Made Righteous by Works: 226 Texts Letter to Nicolas the Solitary St. Hesychios the Priest On Watchfulness and Holiness St. Neilos the Ascetic Ascetic Discourse St. Diadochos of Photiki On Spiritual Knowledge and Discrimination: 100 Texts St. John of Karpathos For the Encouragement of the Monks in India who had Written to Him: 100 Texts Ascetic Discourse Sent at the Request of the Same Monks in India St. Antony the Great On the Character of Men and on the Virtuous Life: 170 Texts This piece by Anthony was changed to an appendix in the English translation by Palmer, Sherrard and Ware (1979, p.  327), because of their view that the language and the general idea is not explicitly Christian and may not have been written by Antony [ Volume 2 ] St. Theodoros the Great Ascetic ( Theodore of Edessa ) A Century of Spiritual Texts Theoretikon St. Maximos the Confessor Four Hundred Texts on Love, with a foreword to Elpidios the Presbyter Two Hundred Texts on Theology and the Incarnate Dispensation of the Son of God (written for Thalassios) Various Texts on Theology, the Divine Economy, and Virtue and Vice On the Lord&apos;s Prayer Thalassios the Libyan On Love, Self Control, and Life in accordance with the Intellect (written for Paul the Presbyter) St. John of Damascus On the Virtues and the Vices A Discourse on Abba Philemon St. Theognostos On the Practice of the Virtues, Contemplation and the Priesthood [ Volume 3 ] St. Philotheos of Sinai Forty Texts on Watchfulness Ilias the Presbyter A Gnomic Anthology: Part I A Gnomic Anthology: Part II A Gnomic Anthology: Part III A Gnomic Anthology: Part IV Theophanis the Monk The Ladder of Divine Graces St. Peter of Damascus Book I: A Treasury of Divine Knowledge Book II: Twenty-Four Discourses St. Symeon the Metaphrast : Paraphrases of the Homilies of St. Macarius of Egypt Spiritual Perfection Prayer Patient Endurance and Discrimination The Raising of the Intellect Love The Freedom of the Intellect [ Volume 4 ] St. Symeon the New Theologian On Faith 153 Practical and Theological Texts The Three Methods of Prayer [attributed to him] Nikitas Stithatos On the Practice of the Virtues: One Hundred Texts On the Inner Nature of Things and on the Purification of the Intellect: One Hundred Texts On Spiritual Knowledge, Love and the Perfection of Living: One Hundred Texts Theoliptos, Metropolitan of Philadelphia On Inner Work in Christ and the Monastic Profession Texts Nikiphoros the Monk On Watchfulness and the Guarding of the Heart St. Gregory of Sinai On Commandments and Doctrines, Warnings and Promises; on Thoughts, Passions and Virtues, and also on Stillness and Prayer: 137 Texts Further Texts On the Signs of Grace and Delusion, Written for the Confessor Longinos: Ten Texts On Stillness: Fifteen Texts On Prayer: Seven Texts St. Gregory Palamas To the Most Reverend Nun Xenia A New Testament Decalogue In Defence of Those who Devoutly Practise a Life of Stillness Three Texts on Prayer and Purity of Heart Topics of Natural and Theological Science and on the Moral and Ascetic Life: 150 Texts The Declaration of the Holy Mountain in Defence of Those who Devoutly Practice a Life of Stillness [ Volume 5 ] This volume has not yet been published in English translation. These are the contents of the modern Greek translation. [ Φιλοκαλία των Ιερών Νυπτικκών, in Greek, translated into modern Greek by Antonios G. Galitis, Perivoli tis Panagias publishers, Thessaloniki, 3rd edition, 2002 ] Kallistos and Ignatios the Xanthopouloses Method and precise cannon for those who choose the hesichastic and monastic life: 100 chapters Kalistos Angelikoudis Kefalaia (Chapters): 81 chapters Kalistos Tilikoudis (presumed the same as Kalistos Angelikoudis) On Hesichastic Practice Kalistos Katafygiotis (presumed the same as Kalistos Angelikoudis) [ http://www.greekorthodoxchurch.org/union_with_god_kallistos_katafytiotis_angelikoudis.html On Union With God and Life of Theoria, part translated into English 2010-06-02 ] On union with God, and Life of Theoria. Saint Simeon Archbishop of Thessaloniki Chapters on the Sacred and Deifying prayer Saint Mark the Gentle On the Words that are Contained in the Sacred Prayer Anonymous Interpretation of &quot; Kyrie Eleyson &quot; (Lord Have Mercy) Saint Simeon the New Theologian Discourse on Faith and teaching for those who say that it is not possible for those who find themselves in the worries of the world to reach the perfection of the virtues, and narration that is beneficial at the beginning. On the Three Ways of Prayer St. Gregory of Sinai Excerpts from the life of St. Maximos Kapsokalivis All Christians Must Pray Uninterruptedly Indices [ See also ] Hesychasm Jesus Prayer Poustinia Hermit St Paisius Velichkovsky The World Nepsis [ Notes ] [ Translations ] [ Palmer G. E. H. Ware Kallistos Kallistos Ware Sherrard Philip Philip Sherrard The Philokalia: The Complete Text Volume 1 1979 Faber and Faber London 0-571-11377-X ] [ Palmer G. E. H. Ware Kallistos Kallistos Ware Sherrard Philip Philip Sherrard The Philokalia: The Complete Text Volume 2 1982 Faber and Faber London 0-571-15466-2 ] [ Palmer G. E. H. Ware Kallistos Kallistos Ware Sherrard Philip Philip Sherrard The Philokalia: The Complete Text Volume 3 1986 Faber and Faber 0-571-17525-2 ] [ Palmer G. E. H. Ware Kallistos Kallistos Ware Sherrard Philip Philip Sherrard The Philokalia: The Complete Text Volume 4 1999 Faber and Faber 0-571-19382-X ] [ Cavarnos Constantine The Philokalia: Love of the Beautiful Institute for Byzantine &amp; Modern Greek Studies 2007 1-884729-79-7 ] [ Cavarnos Constantine The Philokalia: A Second Volume of Selected Readings (Selected Readings from the Philokalia, Volume 2) Institute for Byzantine and Modern Greek Studies 2009 1-884729-91-6 ] [ Studies ] Paschalis M. Kitromilides, &quot; Philokalia&apos;s first journey? &quot; in Idem, An Orthodox Commonwealth: Symbolic Legacies and Cultural Encounters in Southeastern Europe (Aldershot, 2007) (Variorum Collected Studies Series: CS891), Category:Eastern Orthodoxy Category:18th-century Eastern Orthodoxy Category:1782 books Category:Hesychasm Category:18th-century Christian texts Category:Monasticism Category:Christian mysticism Category:Prayer cs:Filokalia de:Philokalie el:Φιλοκαλία es:Filocalia eo:Filokalio fr:Philocalie des Pères Neptiques gl:Filocalia it:Filocalia nl:Filokalia no:Filokalia pl:Filokalia pt:Filocalia ro:Filocalia ru:Добротолюбие sk:Filokalia fi:Filokalia sv:Filokalia tr:Filokalya uk:Філокалія