The Hugh M. Hefner First Amendment Awards, a program of the Hugh M. Hefner Foundation, are given to people who a panel of judges believes have made significant contributions to the protection and enhancement of the rights enshrined in the First Amendment to the United States Constitution. The awards were established in 1979 under the direction of Christie Hefner, daughter of Playboy magazine founder Hugh Hefner. [ Recipients ] [ 1980 ] Nat Hentoff — Book Publishing Erwin Knoll and Howard Morland — Journalism Saul Landau and Jack Willis — Journalism David Goldberger — Law Louis Clark — Government Carey McWilliams — Lifetime Achievement The judges were Tom Bradley, Mayor of Los Angeles; Jules Feiffer, playwright and social cartoonist; Fay Kanin, President, The Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences; Victor Navasky, Editor, The Nation; and Tom Wicker, Columnist and Associate Editor, The New York TImes. [ 1981 ] Frank Rowe — Book Publishing Todd Crowder, Charles Reineke and William Hoffmann Jr. — Journalism Edward Asner, Allan Burns, Seth Freeman, and Gene Reynolds — Arts and Entertainment William Schannen III — Law Morton Halperin — Government Kathy Russell — Education Stanley Fleishman — Lifetime Achievement The judges were Edward Brooke, US Senator, Massachusetts; Nat Hentoff, author and columnist, The Village Voice; Fay Kanin, President, The Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences; Judith Krug, Director, The American Library Association; and Charles Nesson, Dean, Harvard Law School. [ 1982 ] Franklyn S. Haiman — Book Publishing Gene D. Lanier — Education Billie Pirner Garde — Government Frank Snepp — Individual Conscience Steven Pico — Law Robert Berger, Herbert Brodkin, Ernest Kinoy and Herbert Wise — Arts and Entertainment Melody Sands — Journalism Frank J. Donner — Lifetime Achievement The judges were Yvonne Braithwaite Burke, Partner, Kutak, Rode &amp; Huie; Hamilton Fish III, Publisher, The Nation; Florence McMullin, Chair, The Washington Library Association Intellectual Freedom Committee; and Aryeh Neier, Professor of Law, New York University. [ 1983 ] Tom Gish and Pat Gish – Outstanding Community Leadership Mark Lynch – Outstanding National Leadership Osmond K. Fraenkel – Lifetime Achievement The judges were Harriet Pilpel, Attorney, Weil, Gotshal &amp; Manges; Studs Terkel, author and nationally syndicated radio show host; and William Worthy, international journalist and civil liberties activist. [ 1984 ] Helen Troy and Forest Troy – Outstanding Community Leadership Agnus Mackenzie – Outstanding National Leadership Frank Wilkinson – Lifetime Achievement The judges were Martin Agronsky, Agronsky and Company; Alan Dershowitz, Professor, Harvard Law School; and Liza Pike, Program Director, Center for Investigative Reporting. [ 1985 ] Clifford McKenzie – Government Jack C. Landau – Education Ronnie Dugger – Journalism The judges were Burton Joseph, Attorney, Barsy, Joseph &amp; Lichtenstein; Harriet Pilpel, Attorney, Weil, Gotshal &amp; Manges; and Melody Sands, former owner of The Athens News. [ 1986-1987 ] Barry Lynn – Government Glenna Nowell – Education Walter Karp – Book Publishing Charles Levendosky – Journalism William A. Bradford, Jr., Ricki Seidman, and Mary Weidler – Law The judges were Julius Chambers, President, NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund; Maxwell Lillienstein, General Counsel, American Booksellers Association; and Anthony Podesta, Founding President, People for the American Way. [ 1988 ] Jamie Kalven – Book Publishing Herbert Foerstel – Education Rex Armstrong – Law Eric Robert Glitzenstein – Government David Arnett – Journalism Roy Woodruff – Individual Conscience The judges were Charlayne Hunter-Gault, New York Correspondent, The MacNeil / Lehrer NewsHour; Anthony Lewis, syndicated columnist, The New York Times; Steven Pico, First Amendment lecturer and advocate; and Tom Wicker, political columnist, The New York Times. [ 1989 ] Eve Pell – Journalism James A. Haught – Journalism Thomas Michael Devine – Government Joann Bell – Law John Henry Faulk – Individual Conscience Louis Ingelhart – Education Anthony Lewis – Lifetime Achievement The judges were Judith Krug, Director, the American Library Association for Intellectual Freedom; Jack K. Landau, attorney an columnist, Newhouse Newspapers; Clarence Page, Pulitzer Prize-Winning Columnist, Chicago Tribune; and Harriet Pilpel, attorney, Weil, Gotshal &amp; Manges. [ 1990 ] Paul Conrad – Journalism Marilyn Athmann – Education Danny Goldberg – Arts and Entertainment Hans A. Linde – Law Dennis Barrie – Individual Conscience Studs Terkel – Lifetime Achievement The judges were Herbert N. Foerstel, Head of Branch Libraries, University of Maryland; Robert Scheer, National Correspondent, Los Angeles Times; and Maxine Waters, US Representative, California. [ 1991 ] Allan Adler – Book Publishing Inez Austin – Individual Conscience Traci Bauer – Law James Dana – Education Bella Lewitzky – Arts and Entertainment Debbie Nathan – Journalism Sydney Schanberg – Government The judges were Arthur Kropp, President, People for the American Way; Barry Lynn, Co-host, Battleline news radio talk show; Eve Pell, investigative journalist, Freedom of Information Project; and Tom Wicker, political columnist, The New York Times. [ 1992 ] Jules Feiffer – Individual Conscience Bruce Rogow – Law Natalie Robins – Book Publishing Carl Jensen – Education Dannie Martin – Journalism Peter Sussman – Journalism The judges were Dennis Barrie, Executive Director, Contemporary Arts Center of Cincinnati; Norman Dorsen, Stokes Professor of Law, New York University Law School; Mark Goodman, Executive Director, Student Press Law Center; Barbara Kopple, documentary filmmaker; and Reginald Stuart, Assistant News Editor, Knight-Ridder Newspapers. [ 1993-1994 ] Anthony Griffin – Law Robert Landauer – Print Journalism Jeff Cohen and Norman Soloman – Book Publishing Carole Marlowe – Education Jim Warren – Government Jean Otto – Lifetime Achievement The judges were Rex Armstrong, Attorney and Volunteer Counsel, ACLU of Oregon; Jessica Mitford, author and social activist; and Carl Jensen, Founder, Project Censored. [ 1995-1996 ] Jeffrey DeBonis – Government Joycelyn Chadwick-Joshua – Education Seth Rosenfeld – Print Journalism Mary Morello – Arts and Entertainment Tom Hull – Law Morton Mintz – Lifetime Achievement The judges were Chris Finan, Executive Director, The Media Coalition; Marjorie Heins, Director an Staff Counsel, ACLU Arts Censorship Project; and Sydney Schanberg, journalist. [ 1997 ] Dr. Frederic Whitehurst – Government Kelli Peterson – Individual Conscience Katharine Swan – Journalism Cecile Richards – Education American Civil Liberties Union – Law American Library Association – Law The judges were Anthony Griffin, attorney; Bobby Handman, President, People for the American Way; and Burton Joseph, Attorney, Barsy, Joseph &amp; Lichtenstein. [ 1998 ] Lee Brawner – Education Tisha Byars – Individual Conscience Goodlow Sutton and Jean Sutton – Journalism The judges were Nadine Strossen, President, ACLU; Peter S. Prichard, President, Freedom Forum; and Ann K. Symons, President, American Library Association. [ 1999 ] Michael Moore — Arts and Entertainment Eugenie C. Scott — Education Nicolas Becker — Individual Conscience Jeri McGiverin &amp; Elaine Williamson – Law Donald Parker – Lifetime Achievement Bruce Sanford – Book Publishing The judges were Mark Goodman, Executive Director, Student Press Law Center; Molly Ivins, author and columnist, Creators Syndicate; Barbara Kopple, filmmaker; and Clarence Page, columnist, Chicago Tribune. [ 2000-2001 ] Michael Kent Curtis – Book Publishing Mary Dana – Education Nancy Zennie – Education William M. Lawbaugh – Print Journalism James Wheaton – Law John Seigenthaler - Lifetime Achievement Penn &amp; Teller – Arts and Entertainment The judges were Floyd Abrams, Partner, Cahill Gordon &amp; Reindel; Lucy Dalglish; Executive Director, Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press; Robert M. O&apos;Neil, Director, Thomas Jefferson Center for the Protection of Free Expression; and Nadine Strossen, President, ACLU. [ 2002-2003 ] Trina Magi — Education Ronald K. L. Collins and David Michael Skover – Book Publishing David Cole – Book Publishing Nate Blakeslee – Law Steven Aftergood – Government Talia Buford – Print Journalism Bill Maher – Arts and Entertainment Molly Ivins – Lifetime Achievement The judges were Margaret Carlson, CNN &apos;s The Capital Gang and Time Magazine columnist; Ann Richards, former Governor of Texas; and John Seigenthaler, Founder, First Amendment Center. [ 2006 ] Paisley Dodds — Print Journalism Patricia Princehouse — Education [Princehouse speech] : http://www.thenation.com/doc/20060529/princehouse Geoffrey R. Stone – Book Publishing Jack Spadaro — Government Shelby Knox, Marion Lipschutz, and Rose Rosenblatt — Arts and Entertainment Rhett Jackson — Lifetime Achievement The judges were Katrina vanden Heuvel, Editor and Publisher, The Nation; Anthony D. Romero, Executive Director, American Civil Liberties Union; and Eugenie Scott, Executive Director, National Center for Science Education. [ 2008 ] Greg Lukianoff — Freedom of Expression Heather Gillman — Law Mark Klein — Government The judges were Nadine Strossen, President, American Civil Liberties Union and Professor of Law, New York Law School; Geoffrey Stone, Edward H. Levi Distinguished Service Professor at University of Chicago Law School; and David Rubin, Professor and Former Dean, S.I. Newhouse School of Public Communications, Syracuse University. [ 2012 ] Rebecca MacKinnon — Book Publishing Pablo Alvarado — Law Thomas Drake — Government Jesselyn Radack — Government Zack Kopplin — Education Stanley K. Sheinbaum — Lifetime Achievement The judges were Hector Villagra; Patricia Scott Schroeder; Robert Scheer; and Norman Lear. [ Other ] Mary Morello, founder Parents For Rock And Rap — 1996 — Arts and Entertainment [ See also ] Free Speech, &quot; The People’s Darling Privilege &quot; book published in 2000, recognized with the award PEN/Newman&apos;s Own [ References ] [ External links ] Hugh M. Hefner First Amendment Awards Category:Free expression awards Category:Awards established in 1979