[ Butch Cassidy&apos;s gang other uses of Wild Bunch Wild Bunch (disambiguation) ] [ October 2010 ] Butch Cassidy&apos;s Wild Bunch was one of the loosely organized outlaw gangs operating out of the Hole-in-the-Wall in Wyoming during the Old West era in the United States. It was popularized by the 1969 movie, Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid, and took its name from the original Wild Bunch. The gang was led by Butch Cassidy, and it included his closest friend Elzy Lay, the Sundance Kid, Tall Texan, News Carver, Camila Hanks, Laura Bullion, Flat-Nose Curry, Kid Curry and Bob Meeks. They would become the most successful train-robbing gang in history. This Wild Bunch gang claimed to make every attempt to abstain from killing people, and Cassidy boasted of having never killed a man. The non-violent claims about the gang were false, however. Kid Curry, George Curry, Will Carver and other members of the gang killed numerous people during law enforcement&apos;s pursuit of them. Kid Curry alone killed nine lawmen while with the gang, and another two civilians during shootouts, becoming the gang&apos;s most feared member. [ October 2010 ] Elzy Lay killed another two lawmen following a robbery, for which he was wounded, arrested and sentenced to life imprisonment. &quot; Flat-Nose &quot; George Curry killed at least two lawmen, before being killed himself by Grand County, Utah lawmen. [ October 2010 ] The gang was also closely associated with female outlaws Ann Bassett and Josie Bassett, whose ranch near Browns Park supplied the gang often with fresh horses and beef. Both Bassett girls would become romantically involved with several members of the gang, and both would occasionally accompany the gang to one of their hideouts, called &quot; Robbers Roost &quot;. It was through associations with ranchers like this in the area that the gang were allowed considerable mobility, giving them an easy resupply of fresh horses and supplies, and a place to hole up for a night or two. At 1:00 a.m on June 2, 1899, Cassidy, Kid Curry, Logan and Lay robbed a Union Pacific train near Wilcox, Wyoming. They wore masks made from white napkins, possibly pilfered from a Harvey House restaurant. During the hold up they stole between $30,000 and $60,000. The gang split up afterward, a common ploy to throw off pursuers, and several fled to New Mexico. On July 11, 1899, gang members robbed a train near Folsom, New Mexico, without Cassidy&apos;s presence. The pursuit by a posse led by Sheriff Ed Farr culminated in two gun battles, during which Sheriff Farr and two deputies were killed. Gang member Sam Ketchum was wounded and died in custody. Elzy Lay, one of Cassidy&apos;s closest friends and co-founder of the Wild Bunch gang, was wounded and also captured. Cassidy and the other members regrouped in Wyoming. On August 29, 1900, Cassidy, the Sundance Kid, Kid Curry and another unidentified gang member believed to have been Will Carver held up another Union Pacific train at Tipton, Wyoming. Less than a month later, on September 19, 1900, they raided the First National Bank of Winnemucca, Nevada, stealing $32,640. These and other lucrative robberies led to much notoriety and fame. [ The end of the Wild Bunch ] In early 1901, Cassidy along with the Sundance Kid and his girlfriend Etta Place relocated to Patagonia, Argentina, owing to constantly having to remain on the move because of Pinkerton detectives and other lawmen. That same year, on April 1, Will Carver was wounded by lawmen and died later in May of complications. Ben Kilpatrick was captured in Tennessee in December, 1901, along with Laura Bullion, and received a 20-year prison sentence, with her receiving a five year sentence. Kid Curry killed two lawmen in Knoxville, Tennessee, escaping capture, then traveled to Montana where he killed a rancher that had killed his brother Johnny years before. He then returned to Tennessee, was captured, only to escape once again. Kid Curry was killed in Colorado in 1904, during a shootout with lawmen. In 1908, Cassidy and Sundance were allegedly killed in a shootout with Bolivia n cavalry. Etta Place disappeared completely, with her last known sighting being in 1909 in San Francisco. It is believed that she reinvented herself, becoming a brothel and hotel owner named Eunice Gray, in Fort Worth, Texas, dying in 1962. Elzy Lay was released from prison in 1906, and after a brief visit to the Bassett ranch in Utah he relocated to California, where he became a respected businessman, dying there in 1934. Ben Kilpatrick was released from prison in 1911, and was killed during a train robbery in Texas in 1912. Laura Bullion was released from prison in 1905 and lived the remainder of her life as a seamstress, dying in Memphis, Tennessee in 1961, the last of the Wild Bunch. [ In Popular culture ] [ 0049848 ”The Three Outlaws &quot; (1956) ] The Three Outlaws, starring Neville Brand as Butch Cassidy and Alan Hale Jr as the Sundance Kid, is a 1956 fictional film of the duo&apos;s exploits with Wild Bunch member William &quot; News &quot; Carver as the third outlaw in the title. The Wild bunch gang appears in the manga series Drifters so far only two of them were confirmed the rest are unknown. [ See also ] Hole in the Wall Gang [ References ] [ External links ] Butch &amp; Sundance - Wyoming Tailes and Trails Was Henry Long Harry Longabaugh? Category:Outlaw gangs in the United States Category:American bank robbers Category:Gangs in Wyoming fr:Wild Bunch (Butch Cassidy) ja:ワイルドバンチ (強盗団) sv:Wild Bunch