[ Belem ] [ Brazil ] { North } { 22px } { Pará } { Mayor } { Duciomar Costa ( } { PTB ) } { Founded } { January 12, 1616 } { 1070 } { 2009 } { 1,437,600 ( } { 10th ) } { 1322 } { 2,249,405 } { 3 } { 1 } { 27 } { S } { 48 } { 30 } { W } { 10 } { +55 91 } { Postal Code } { 66000-000 } Belém (literally &quot; Bethlehem &quot; ) is a Brazilian city, the capital and largest city of state of Pará, in the country&apos;s north region. It is the entrance gate to the Amazon with a busy port, airport and bus/coach station. Belém lies approximately 100  km upriver from the Atlantic Ocean, on the Pará River, which is part of the greater Amazon River system, separated from the larger part of the Amazon delta by Ilha de Marajó ( Marajo Island ). With an estimated population of 1,402,056 people — 2,249,405, or considering its metropolitan area — is the 11th most populous city in Brazil (besides being the second largest in the North Region, second only Manaus, in Amazonas state) as well as be the 16th by economic relevance. Founded in 1616 by the Kingdom of Portugal, Belém was the first European colony on the Amazon but did not become part of Brazil until 1775. The newer part of the city has modern buildings and skyscrapers. The colonial portion retains the charm of tree-filled squares, churches and traditional blue tiles. The city has a rich history and architecture from colonial times. Recently it witnessed a skyscraper boom. Its metropolitan area has over 2 million inhabitants. Belém is also known as the Metropolis of the Brazilian Amazon region or the Cidade das Mangueiras (city of mango trees) due to the vast number of those trees found in the city. Brazilians often refer to the city as Belém do Pará ( &quot; Belém of Pará &quot; ) rather than just Belém so as to differentiate it from the biblical Bethlehem in the West Bank (Palestinian territories) and also from Belém in Portugal. Belém is served by two airports: Val de Cães International Airport which connects the city with the rest of Brazil and other cities in South America and Brig. Protásio de Oliveira Airport (Júlio César) Airport dedicated to general aviation. The city is also home to the Federal University of Pará. [ Name ] The name Belém is the Portuguese for Bethlehem, the city where Jesus Christ was born. The city had a few other names before becoming Belém. Notice also that Brazil has a city called Natal, which means Christmas. [ Geography ] [ false right ] The city of Belém, capital of Pará, is full of indentations and recesses forming islands all around it. There are 55 of these islets, most of which are wild and uninhabited, although some are home to small populations. These include the islands of Mosqueiro, fringed by 14 freshwater beaches, and Caratateua which receive a large number of visitors in summertime. In addition to these and also near Belém, is the island of Tatuoca which is the location of the only geophysical station in Latin America, one of seven in the world. Situated in the Guajará bay, on the estuary of the Rivers Guamá River and Pará, the city began as a river port in 1616, immediately after the French were driven out of São Luís, the capital of the state of Maranhão. It is known as the &quot; City of the Mango Trees &quot; because of the large number of those trees growing there. [ Climate ] Belém has a tropical rainforest climate. A tropical rainforest climate, also known as an equatorial climate, is a type of tropical climate in which there is no dry season. All months have mean precipitation values of at least 60  mm. It is usually found at latitudes within five degrees of the equator, which are dominated by the Intertropical Convergence Zone. The tropical rainforest climate is denoted Af in the Köppen climate classification. Tropical rainforest is the natural vegetation in equatorial regions. [ Belém yes yes pastel 30.9 30.5 30.4 30.8 31.3 31.7 31.7 32.1 32.1 32.2 32.3 31.9 22.1 22.2 22.4 21.8 22.6 22.1 21.7 21.7 21.7 21.6 21.9 22.0 green 366.5 417.5 436.2 360.0 304.4 140.2 152.1 131.1 140.8 116.1 111.8 216.4 136.4 98.9 102.3 123.0 186.0 225.0 254.2 257.3 228.0 229.4 204.0 179.8 World Meteorological Organization. Climatological Information for Belém, accessed 26 March 2012. Hong Kong Observatory (sun only 1961-1990). Climatological Information for Belem, Brazil, accessed 26 March 2012. August 2010 ] [ Vegetation ] { Emílio Goeldi Museum. } The Amazon represents more than half the planet&apos;s remaining rainforests and comprises the largest and most species-rich tract of tropical rainforest in the world. Wet tropical forests are the most species-rich biome, and tropical forests in the Americas are consistently more species rich than the wet forests in Africa and Asia. { Turner, I.M. 2001. The ecology of trees in the tropical rainforest. } { Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. ISBN 0-521-80183-4 } As the largest tract of tropical rainforest in the Americas, the Amazonian rainforests have unparalleled biodiversity. More than one-third of all species in the world live in the Amazon Rainforest. { Amazon Rainforest, Amazon Plants, Amazon River Animals } [ History ] Ver-o-Peso market. In 1616 the fortified settlement of Feliz Lusitânia, later called Nossa Senhora de Belém do Grão Pará (Our Lady of Bethlehem of the Great Para) and Santa Maria de Belém (St. Mary of Bethlehem), was established, consolidating Portuguese supremacy over the French in what is now northern Brazil. Belém was given city status in 1655 and was made capital of the State when Pará state was separated from Maranhão in 1772. The early decades of the 19th century were marked by political instability. Uprisings and internecine strife were finally ended in 1836, after considerable loss of life. { History of Belém } The sugar trade was important in the Belém region until the end of the 17th century. Thereafter the city&apos;s economic importance alternately rose and fell. Cattle ranching supplanted sugar until the 18th century, when cultivation of rice, cotton, and coffee became profitable. With the settlement of southern Brazil, where such crops could be produced more reasonably, Belém declined again. The city subsequently became the main exporting centre of the Amazon rubber industry, and by 1866 its position was further enhanced by the opening of the Amazon, Tocantins, and Tapajós rivers to navigation. The rubber era terminated after the boom of 1910–12, but Belém continued to be the main commercial centre of northern Brazil and the entrepôt for the Amazon valley. { Rubber era in Belém } The most valuable products now exported from the Amazon by way of Belém are aluminium, iron ore, and other metals. { Metals in Belém } Nuts (chiefly Brazil nuts ), pineapples, cassava, jute, wood veneers, and hardwoods. Japanese immigration after the 1930s was an important factor in developing jute and black pepper, notably at Tomé-Açu, just south of Belém, and near Santarém. { Japanese Immigration to Pará and Belém } Marajó Island, the largest fluvial island in the world, which lies just across the Rio Pará from Belém, has some livestock grazing. { About Marajó Island } Electricity is provided by the massive Tucuruí Dam, some 300  km southwest of the city on the Tocantins River. { Tucuruí Dam } Belém has a modern appearance with tree-lined streets, several plazas and public gardens, and many noteworthy buildings. The north&apos;s leading educational and cultural centre, it is the seat of a bishopric, and its cathedral (Igreja da Sé, founded in 1917) is one of Brazil&apos;s largest. Santo Alexandre, the oldest of Belém&apos;s churches, was built in 1616. The Museu (museum) Paraense Emílio Goeldi, the Teatro da Paz (a classical theatre), and the public library and archives are other notable institutions. The Universidade Federal do Pará (1957), a teacher-training school, an agricultural institute, and an institute for research on tropical diseases are also in the city. The Ver-o-Peso (Portuguese: &quot; see the weight &quot; ) market in the old port centre is a major tourist attraction. The city is also home to a large football stadium. [ Demographics ] According to the IBGE of 2008, there were 2,139,000 people residing in the Metropolitan Region of Belém. The population density was [ 1337.2 PD/sqkm PD/sqmi ]. The last PNAD (National Research for Sample of Domiciles) census revealed the following numbers: 1,379,655 Pardo (brown) people (64.5%), 588,225 White people (27.5%), 156,147 Black people (7.3%), 14,973 Asian or Amerindian people (0.7%). [ http://www.ibge.gov.br/home/estatistica/populacao/condicaodevida/indicadoresminimos/sinteseindicsociais2008/indic_sociais2008.pdf Síntese de Indicadores Sociais 2008 IBGE Belém, Brazil PDF 85-240-3919-1 2009-01-31 2008 Portuguese ] According to an autosomal DNA genetic study from 2011, the ancestral composition of the population of Belém is: 69,70% European, 19,40% Native American and 10,90% African. { http://www.plosone.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0017063 } [ Education ] Portuguese is the official national language, and thus the primary language taught in schools. But English and Spanish are part of the official high school curriculum. [ Education institutions ] Universidade Federal do Pará (UFPA); Universidade do Estado do Pará (UEPA); Universidade Federal Rural da Amazônia (UFRA); Universidade da Amazônia (UNAMA); Centro Universitário do Pará (Cesupa); Amazon Valley Academy International School (AVA); [ Culture ] { Cathedral of Sé. } [ Círio de Nazaré ] [ section June 2009 ] On the second Sunday in October, Pará celebrates the largest and greatest religious event in Brazil. The procession of the Círio of Nazaré. History goes that the popular Círio tradition started when a farmer and lumberman called Plácido José de Souza found an image of the Saint at the margin of the Murucutu creek, where the Basilica of Nazaré stands today. The humble man, then, decided to take the image home. However, the image would mysteriously go back to the place where it was initially found every time he took it home. So Plácido decided to build, at the margin of the creek, a small chapel. This episode was reported throughout the region as miraculous, attracting hundreds of believers to see the image and pay homage to it. Since then, the Círio is celebrated as a long procession of faith, in which thousands of people follow the saint through the streets of Belém, in a manifestation that lasts around five hours for unity, emotion and devotion, with no distinction of social classes, to express the strongest devotion to the belief. The Círio is the regarded as the &quot; Christmas of the Amazon &quot; because it is a moment of congregation in which everyone is involved in the arrangements to receive the saint, in an atmosphere of fraternity with people becoming more sympathetic and happier. In early September, minor celebrations take place as a spiritual preparation for the Círio, with thousands of images scattered all over the capital and neighboring cities, gathering families from different parts of the capital to run pilgrimage of Our Lady among choirs and prayers. Círio de Nazaré celebration. In the old times the celebration was limited to the Trasladação (Transfer), the Círio, the Procession and the Re-círio (post-Círio). But it was necessary to incorporate new manifestations to the tradition due to the people&apos;s yearning to honor their patron saint. On Saturday morning, prior to the Círio, the Saint is taken to the square of Ananindeua, a nearby city, in front of the Main Church to start at 6 am the Road Pilgrimage, organized by the Pará State Cargo Transportation Companies&apos; Union (SINDICARPA), which conducts the image to the Icoaraci pier by road for a field mass. Then, the river pilgrimage starts. It was created and organized by the former president of the Pará Tourism Company (PARATUR), Carlos Roque, to honor the &quot; water men &quot; who regard the Virgin of Nazareth as their patron saint. PARATUR also promotes a traditional ship contest to award the most originally decorated boat. When the Sacred Image leaves Icoaraci in the event&apos;s official ship, a Navy Corvette, it is followed by tens of boats and ships of all colors and types, decorated to greet the Virgin and follow her through the waters of the Guajará Bay to the pier of Belém, where it will be escorted by motorcyclists all the way to the Gentil Bittencourt School, only leaving at 6 pm for the Trasladação (Transfer), which is a symbolism for reviving the story of the discovery of the Saint and its return to the place where it was found, in a candle-lit procession, following the Carriage that is tied to a rope that is carried by the faithful until it arrives at the Sé Cathedral. Cord and procession. During its course, a firework show takes place with thousands of colorful fireworks, sponsored by the Stevedore s &apos; Union, marking the passage of the Saint until its arrival at the Cathedral, where it is received, gently, with a religious program. At daybreak of the next day, the faithful start to gather at the Old City, believing that this will bring them closer to the Virgin. At around 4 am, the rope is stretched by Our Lady&apos;s guards and, within minutes, is held by the &quot; vowers &quot;, who have long looked forward to an incredible back-and-forth choreography, like human waves, sparking the solidarity from the bystanders, who try to quench the thirst of those carrying the rope by offering them water. While the 12 cars that take part in the procession, like the scouts&apos; barge, the new barge, the angels&apos; barge, the miracle&apos;s barge, amongst others, are orderly positioned to receive wax figures, wooden house miniatures and other images to thank for their achievements over the year. At 7 o&apos;clock, the archbishop conducts Our Lady&apos;s image to the carriage as the bells toll and the fireworks explode, thus setting the beginning of the biggest religious event of Latin America.Throughout the course, the faithful make reflections on biblical themes, pray, sing, pay homage with a shredded paper shower, lifting their arms towards the sky, acclaiming during the procession and praising the Virgin. From the Padre Champagnat Street towards the Ver-o-Peso Market, passing by Portugal Avenue and Castilho França Boulevard, going up the Presidente Vargas Avenue, reaching the Republic Square to get to the Nazaré Avenue as far as the Architectonic Centre of Nazareth, known for its Sanctuary Square. As it arrives at the square, the image is removed from the carriage for the celebration of a mass and then lifted so that everybody will be blessed by the patron saint of Pará. This marks the end of the procession, which is filled with emotion and endless applause by the crowd. The festivities are 15 days long, with religious celebrations, like the Children&apos;s Círio, and its procession, held two Sundays after the Círio. Cultural activities, visiting the Círio Museum, and leisure, with an amusement park at the Arraial de Nazaré. The Re-Círio marks the end of the celebrations, with a shorter course, but with no less emotion, for the Saint&apos;s farewell, with tears, waving with white handkerchiefs, hope and thanks, to the Gentil Bittencourt chapel, bringing a feeling of lightness and renovation to expect for another year. [ Convention and Fair Centre of the Amazon ] Built in a 23,000-square-metre area, the Hangar Convention and Fair Center of the Amazon has 12 rooms, ticket offices, baggage keeping, press room, and a food court, distributed in two big buildings with a parking lot for 800 vehicles. In the outdoor area, genuine Amazonian trees will soon be planted. With Hangar, Belém joins the market for national conventions that take place in a different city each time. National conventions have never been held in the Northern region. An example is the Brazilian Computer Society Congress. Hangar has some of the best technologies available in the world and is the most modern and functional space for events in the country. The business tourism sector has recently grown all over Brazil. According to the Brazilian Association of Convention and Fair Centers (ABRACCEF), on average, there are 17,500 events happening in the 53 main convention and exhibition centres of Brazil. These activities bring together approximately 28 million participants. Belém has a great potential for this type of tourism. The auditorium has room for 2,160 participants. [ Architecture ] In many ways, Belém&apos;s colonial architecture reflects the seventeenth century architecture of Lisbon in Portugal which served as the inspiration for the main housing projects of the time, with the frequent use of tile-hung facades. Neoclassical architecture is also present in buildings such as the Theatro da Paz, built in 1874. Many of the buildings at the end of the nineteenth century and early twentieth century also echo French architecture. Belém began with the narrow streets of the Cidade Velha (Old City), a district which still preserves some structures that the Portuguese colonials built here, places like Forte do Castelo, a fort built to defend the region against French, Dutch and British colonization attempts, and one of the first structures in the capital. The Ver-o-pêso market is the biggest open market in Latin America where you can find everything, from the most exotic fruit, to the scented baths. [ Cuisine ] The local Amerindian culture extracts colors, scents, flavors and native tastes from the nature for a rich and exotic cuisine, adding up to the most authentic of regional cuisines. One such dish, &quot; Cupuaçu &quot;, comes from the Cupuaçu tree, found in the Amazonian woods. Cupuaçu is easily identified by its smell and sour taste and it is highly appreciated both by local people and by tourists. Its pulp is also extracted to make juices, candies, jellies, liquors, and ice cream. Açaí is a palm tree with a long thin stem. Açaí is also known as Jussara, is purple-colored and has a delicious taste. It has been appreciated by the local population for a long time, but lately it has reached the national menu. Freshwater crab is a very popular dish in the city&apos;s cuisine, and is only found in swamps. Its meat, well tempered, can be served in different forms: as a shell, the so-called unha (the claws) or toc-toc. It is a traditional local delicacy. &quot; Maniçoba &quot;, is one of the highlights of the local cuisine. Its preparation is long and its final appearance is quite surprising for those who have never tried it, due to the dark look of the cooked maniva (ground manioc leaves). But this first impression ends pretty soon, after you taste the meal and its seemingly awkward ingredients. The maniçoba is served either in pottery dishes or in ordinary ones. It can be eaten with rice or only with manioc flour and capsicum. [ World Social Forum ] The World Social Forum 2009 took place from January 27 to February 1 in Belém. [ Main sights ] [ June 2011 ] [ Tourism ] [ Amazon Biopark Zoo ] Located less than 15 kilometers from the center of Bethlehem, in the neighborhood of Tenon, the Bioparque Amazon - Crocodile Safari is surrounded by forests, rivers and streams. Summary of the Amazon landscape with lush flora and fauna, the zoo has about 14 Para miles of trails in an area composed of four interconnected ecosystems. A large attractive Bioparque is the Museum of Paleontology and Malacology where visitors can watch a collection of three thousand pieces of exposed shells and mollusks collected from all continents. On site, you will also see paintings with motifs of cabloco Amazon. Bioparque The Amazon is a private investment, authorized and licensed by IBAMA to function as C class zoo, the only category of Pará There are four different species of alligators in a population of thousands of individuals, highlighting açu for alligator, monkeys, anteaters, and the otters, hyacinth macaw, papagaios, tucannos, pacaranas, harpy eagle, among other animals. { Amazon Biopark Zoo (Bioparque Amazônia) } [ Rodrigues Alves Wood–Botanic Garden ] Inspired by the Bois de Boulogne Park in Paris, the Rodrigues Alves Wood is a little piece of Amazonia preserved in the middle of the city. Comprising 16 hectare s, in the ample Avenida Almirante Barroso, one of the city&apos;s busiest thoroughfares, having 2,500 native species, an orchidary, lakes, caverns, waterfalls and even a replica of a mountain. There you can see small animals characteristic to the region, such as squirrel monkey s, agouti s and macaw s. [ The Estação das Docas Complex ] The Estação das Docas Complex reopened the windows of Belém to Guajará Bay. The restoration project covers the area of old warehouses of the Pará Docks Company. Constructed from prefabricated metal structures in England and that were built at the beginning of the twentieth century in Belém. { Estação das Docas } There are 18 thousand square meters of urbanised area, with coffee bar services, various restaurants, stores, travel agencies, banks, in addition to an auditorium and two memorials: The Porto Memorial and the Fortaleza de São Pedro Nolasco Memorial There is, also, a fluvial station and extensive external area. [ Ver-o-Peso Market ] Created in 1688, as a result of the Portuguese deciding to levy a tax for everything entering and leaving Amazonia. Despite resembling a large retailer, the mixture of colours, fragrances and objects is very interesting as well as folkloric [ May 2012 ]. Medicinal herbs, various regional fruits, arts and crafts, domestic utilities, meats, fish and seasonings and spices can be found there. The Market brings together two thousand stalls and traders in every part and is located near to the old Mercado de Ferro (Iron market), on the quay s. [ Infrastructure ] [ Airports ] { Belém International Airport. } Belém International Airport (Val de Cães) is the major airport serving the city of Belém. The building design uses plane curves on its roof to permit light to enter its entire large terminal hall. The architect Sérgio Parada used adopted multiple-use totems integrated with light projectors, a sound system, air conditioning and public telephones. Currently Belém International Airport serves 2.7 million passengers a year, in a constructed area of 33,255.17 square metres. { International Airport of Belém } Traditionally called Val-de-Cães Airport, it is responsible for increasing tourism in the Amazon region, as well as for the outflow of products and attracting new investments. The passenger terminal is fully air conditioned on two levels and has &quot; futuristic &quot; architecture, designed to take advantage of natural lighting. People with special needs have individualized service with own equipment at specific locations to facilitate their access. The terminal&apos;s interior is decorated with plants native to the Amazon region and is enclosed by a source able to imitate the sound of the rains that fall every day in the region. The smaller Brig. Protásio de Oliveira Airport (Júlio César) also administrated by Infraero, is used for general aviation. [ Highways ] BR-316 is the major access highway for those coming from the Northeastern Brazil. For visitors from the Southern, Southeastern and Mid-Eastern Regions, the best route is BR-010, which originates in Brasília in the South, and also PA-150, a route that links Belém to Southern Pará. [ Fluvial ] Belém can be reached by the Tocantins River and Amazonas River and by the Atlantic Ocean. The city of Belem has been referenced in the opening episode of the TV series- No Ordinary Family, where Powell&apos;s go for a family vacation. [ Distances ] [ 2933 km on ] [ 3250 km on ] [ 2132 km on ] [ 1489 km on ] [ 923 km on ] [ 806 km on ] [ 807 km on ] [ 3577 km on ] [ 2970 km on ] [ 2824 km on ] São Paulo : Rio de Janeiro : Brasília : Manaus : Teresina : São Luis : Santarém / Pará : Florianópolis : Cuiabá : Belo Horizonte : [ Personalities ] Benedito Nunes - philosopher Caroline Ribeiro - model Fafá de Belém - singer Giovanni Silva de Oliveira - footballer Giuseppe Antonio Landi - architect Hélio Gracie - martial artist João Amazonas - Marxist theoretician João Clemente Baena Soares - diplomat Lyoto Machida - mixed martial artist Paulo Henrique Chagas de Lima - footballer Sócrates - footballer and physician Lucio Flavio Pinto - Environmental and Political Journalist { river Guama. } [ References ] [ External links ] [ Brazil ] Website with information, guides and tourist information about Belém (English) Website of festivals, events and cultural agenda of the City of Belém (English) Category:Belém Category:Populated places in Pará Category:State capitals in Brazil Category:Port cities in Brazil Category:Populated places established in 1616 af:Belém ar:بيليم bn:বেলেঁ (ব্রাজিল) zh-min-nan:Belém bg:Белен (Пара) br:Belém do Pará ca:Belém cs:Belém cy:Belém da:Belém de:Belém (Pará) et:Belém eml:Belém es:Belém (Brasil) eo:Belém fa:بلم fr:Belém ga:Belém gl:Belém do Pará ko:벨렝 hr:Belém io:Belém bpy:বেলেম id:Belém os:Белен (Пара) it:Belém he:בלם (עיר) ka:ბელენი sw:Belém la:Bethlehem (Brasilia) lv:Belena lt:Belenas lmo:Belém hu:Belém (Pará) mg:Belém mr:बेलेम mwl:Belém nl:Belém (Pará) ja:ベレン (パラー州) no:Belém oc:Belém (Pará) pnb:بیلیم pl:Belém pt:Belém ro:Belém ru:Белен (Пара) simple:Belém (Brazil) sk:Belém sr:Белем fi:Belém sv:Belém tet:Belém (Pará) th:เบเลง tg:Белен tr:Belém uk:Белен vi:Belém vo:Belém (Pará) war:Belém zh:贝伦 (巴西)