[ TheHollowRH.jpg The Hollow and Old Littleover Cottage England 52.906 -1.505 Littleover Derbyshire Derby Derbyshire East Midlands Derby South DERBY DE23 DE 01332 SK3334 ] Littleover is a large suburb of Derby, England situated between Rose Hill, Normanton, Sunny Hill, South Derbyshire and Mickleover about [ 3 mi km ] south west of Derby city centre. [ History ] The Towers and Cottage The history of the name of Littleover is simple. It is derived from &apos;Little Ufre&apos; (Domesday book) and in Old English &quot; Ofer &quot; which meant a slope or little hill, whilst its neighbouring Mickleover is known to be from &apos;Mickle Ufre&apos; meaning large hill. Littleover was also formerly known as Parver Over. The village, like many settlements in England, is partially of Saxon and partially of Roman origin; the Burton Road is a Roman road linking the A38 to the City Centre. Its Roman origin is easily confirmed due to its direct route. Burton Road, the A5250, leaves the A38 as Rykneld Road and becomes Pastures Hill just past Heatherton Village. At the top of Pastures Hill it crosses a junction with Hillsway and Chain Lane, whereupon it becomes Burton Road and remains so up to its junction with Babington Lane in Derby city centre. Despite the attraction of the Burton Road Babington lane route, it is possible that the course of the original Rykneld Way did not deviate but continued in a straight line through the rear of what was the Crest Motel, across Chain Lane, then following Owlers Lane and Constable Lane, across what is now the Bemrose School fields, eventually joining what is now called Uttoxeter Old road and further to the recorded camp around Belper Road. This would seem more logical a Roman Route. [ November 2008 ] Littleover was in the parish of Mickleover until 1866. [ November 2008 ] The White Swan Littleover village is situated around the shopping area on Burton Road.The village&apos;s public house is called the Half Moon and is noted as being one of two inns in 1577. The older part of the village around St Peter&apos;s church was built in the 14th century. The Village has another public house, the White Swan which can be found on Shepherd Street also near the older part of Littleover. Directly opposite the White Swan is Church Street which takes its name from the aforementioned St Peter&apos;s and links up with the Hollow which is believed to be of Medieval origin. The age of the Hollow and Church Street are evidenced by the buildings that can be found there; even today the former contains the thatched roofed Littleover Cottage, (very rare in Derbyshire ) whilst on Church Street can be found a detached white house, which in its time has been called the White House and would probably have been there before most of the buildings around it. The White House it is believed may date in part to the 16th Century, whereupon it probably would have stood alone with the thatched cottage and church. In earlier times this area was the centre of activity in the village where the square was used for markets, proclamations and general celebrations on public holidays. The Crest Hotel, built around the late 1800s on a site previously occupied by a windmill, burnt down in 2002. Today a housing development stands where the hotel used to be. [ Education ] Gayton Avenue School The final location of Derby School was in Littleover on Moorway Lane, the site is now occupied by Derby Moor Community Sports College. Infant, Junior and Primary Schools: Gayton Junior School Griffe Field Primary School built as part of the Heatherton Village estate in 1999 St Peter&apos;s CofE Junior School { Derby Moor Community Sports College and the } { Millenium Centre } Secondary and Sixth Form Schools: Derby Grammar School Derby High School Derby Moor Community Sports College Trust Littleover Community School The Millennium Centre [ Notable residents ] Lee Camp, goalkeeper for Nottingham Forest F.C. Judith Hann, TV presenter (Tomorrow&apos;s World) was born here Judith Hann biography at IMDb accessed June 2007 Fiona May, athlete. Michael Socha, actor Lucy Ward, folk musician Kelli Young, member of British pop group, Liberty X [ References ] [ External links ] BBC Guide Focus on Littleover Derby Guide Littleover Methodist Church St Peter&apos;s Church, Littleover Littleover news from the Derby Telegraph Category:Districts of Derby