[ May 2011 ] [ style May 2011 ] Victorian ballroom dances at the Gaskell Ball Historical dance (or early dance) is a collective term covering a wide variety of dance types from the past as they are danced in the present. Dances from the early 20th century can be recreated precisely, being within living memory and from the age of film and video recording. However, earlier dance types must be reconstructed from evidence such as surviving notations and instruction manuals. Historical dances may be danced as performance, for pleasure at themed balls or dance clubs, as historical reenactment, or for musicological or historical research. The article below mostly discusses Western European social dances. For performance dancing, see the History of dance article. [ Categories of Historical dance ] [ Medieval dance ] Very little evidence survives about medieval dance. What we do know comes mostly from paintings and works of literature from this time period. Here are some names of the dances which we know existed during the Middle Ages. Dance types: Carole Ductia Estampie ( Istampitta ) Saltarello Trotto The farandole is also frequently presented as a medieval dance, based on surviving iconography. [ Renaissance dance ] The earliest surviving dance manuals come from the Renaissance, including examples by Fabritio Caroso and Thoinot Arbeau. These allow us to reconstruct the dances with a greater degree of certainty. Note the large number of dances with Spanish origin, reflecting the cultural influence of the dominating power of the age. Dance types: Allemande (Almain) Basse danse (Bassadance) Branle ( Bransle ) Canario Coranto Dompe Galliard La volta, variation on the Galliard Sarabanda Spagnoletta Tourdion, a fast Galliard [ Shakespearean dance ] [ Baroque dance ] It was during the baroque era that John Playford published The Dancing Master, which, along with similar publications, provides us with a large repertoire of baroque English country dance s. Apart from country dances, the most well documented dance style of the baroque was that developed at the French court during the 17th century. The term &quot; baroque dance &quot; is often used to refer specifically to this French style, reflecting the dominating power of the era. Dance types include Bourrée Canary Chaconne (French) Courante Entrée grave Forlana Gavotte Gigue Loure Menuet (minuet) Musette Passacaille (passacaglia) Passepied Rigaudon Sarabande Tambourin The French style was also danced in England where they introduced their own dance type: Hornpipe [ Dance in the English Regency ] We&apos;ve only just finished the French Revolution and women&apos;s fashions enjoy a very brief period of sensibility. Clothing tends to be light and unrestrictive, encouraging dances with lots of skipping and jumping, such as English Country Dance Regency dance Polonaise Quadrille Scotch Reel [ Dance in the mid 19th century ] Starting with the great international polka craze of 1844 anyone who was anyone was dancing. Women are in hoop skirts, and turning dances help to keep the skirts out of the way. Five Step Waltz Polka Schottische Two Step Waltz [ Dance in the late 19th century, through 1910 or so ] All the same dances that were done in the mid century were still being done in the late century, but by fewer people and with less enthusiasm. Dance masters, in a vain attempt to maintain their place in society and in the economy, invented dances of greater and greater complexity. The bustle replaces the hoop, which necessitated a few changes in dancing. At the same time, Ragtime music begins its infiltration. Cakewalk Krakowiak Mazurka Racket Redowa Waltz [ Dance in the Ragtime era ] Vernon and Irene Castle bring an air of respectability to couple dancing, and spark what was arguably the largest U.S. dance craze ever. By the end of WWI people eshew these as old fashioned. Foxtrot Maxixe One-Step Tango Waltz [ Dance in the 1920s ] It&apos;s the roaring twenties, and kids are spoiled. For the first time, there is a class of children who don&apos;t have to immediately go to work to support the family. This is an era of highly energetic dances done by the younger generation. Black Bottom Charleston Foxtrot Shag Waltz [ Dance in the 1930s and 1940s ] More than ever before, white society is getting its dances from black society. Swing music and swing dancing are what&apos;s happening Big Apple (dance) Foxtrot Swing Waltz Tap Spinning Dance Jitterbug [ See also ] History of dance Ballet Masque List of dances An American Ballroom Companion [ External links ] [ Arts/Performing_Arts/Dance/Historical/ Historical Dance ] Early Dance Circle Calendar of Historical Dance Library of Congress : Dance Manuals 1490-1920 Friends of the English Regency de:Historischer Tanz es:Danzas antiguas fr:Danse historique pl:Taniec dworski ru:Исторические танцы