Bioremediation is the use of micro-organism metabolism to remove pollutants. Technologies can be generally classified as in situ or ex situ. In situ bioremediation involves treating the contaminated material at the site, while ex situ involves the removal of the contaminated material to be treated elsewhere. Some examples of bioremediation technologies are phytoremediation, bioventing, bioleaching, landfarming, bioreactor, composting, bioaugmentation, rhizofiltration, and biostimulation. Bioremediation can occur on its own (natural attenuation or intrinsic bioremediation) or can be spurred on via the addition of fertilizers to increase the bioavailability within the medium (biostimulation). Recent advancements have also proven successful via the addition of matched microbe strains to the medium to enhance the resident microbe population&apos;s ability to break down contaminants. Microorganisms used to perform the function of bioremediation are known as bioremediators. [ http://www.terranovabiosystems.com/science/remediation-resources.html Terra Nova&apos;s Environmental Remediation Resuources Terranovabiosystems.com 2009-08-31 2011-03-22 ] Not all contaminants, however, are easily treated by bioremediation using microorganisms. For example, heavy metals such as cadmium and lead are not readily absorbed or captured by microorganisms. The assimilation of metals such as mercury into the food chain may worsen matters. Phytoremediation is useful in these circumstances because natural plants or transgenic plant s are able to bioaccumulate these toxins in their above-ground parts, which are then harvested for removal. [ Meagher, RB Phytoremediation of toxic elemental and organic pollutants Current Opinion in Plant Biology 3 2 2000 153–162 10712958 10.1016/S1369-5266(99)00054-0 ] The heavy metals in the harvested biomass may be further concentrated by incineration or even recycled for industrial use. The elimination of a wide range of pollutants and wastes from the environment requires increasing our understanding of the relative importance of different pathways and regulatory networks to carbon flux in particular environments and for particular compounds, and they will certainly accelerate the development of bioremediation technologies and biotransformation processes. [ Diaz E (editor). Microbial Biodegradation: Genomics and Molecular Biology 1st Caister Academic Press 2008 http://www.horizonpress.com/biod http://www.horizonpress.com/biod 1-904455-17-4 ] [ Genetic engineering approaches ] The use of genetic engineering to create organisms specifically designed for bioremediation has great potential. [ Lovley, DR Cleaning up with genomics: applying molecular biology to bioremediation Nature Reviews. Microbiology. 2003 1 1 35 –44 15040178 10.1038/nrmicro731 ] The bacterium Deinococcus radiodurans (the most radioresistant organism known) has been modified to consume and digest toluene and ion ic mercury from highly radioactive nuclear waste. [ Brim H, McFarlan SC, Fredrickson JK, Minton KW, Zhai M, Wackett LP, Daly MJ Engineering Deinococcus radiodurans for metal remediation in radioactive mixed waste environments Nature Biotechnology 2000 18 1 85 –90 10625398 10.1038/71986 ] [ Mycoremediation ] Mycoremediation is a form of bioremediation in which fungi are used to decontaminate the area. The term mycoremediation refers specifically to the use of fungal mycelia in bioremediation. One of the primary roles of fungi in the ecosystem is decomposition, which is performed by the mycelium. The mycelium secretes extracellular enzyme s and acid s that break down lignin and cellulose, the two main building blocks of plant fiber. These are organic compounds composed of long chains of carbon and hydrogen, structurally similar to many organic pollutants. The key to mycoremediation is determining the right fungal species to target a specific pollutant. Certain strains have been reported to successfully degrade the nerve gas es VX and sarin. In one conducted experiment, a plot of soil contaminated with diesel oil was inoculated with mycelia of oyster mushroom s; traditional bioremediation techniques (bacteria) were used on control plots. After four weeks, more than 95% of many of the PAH ( polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon s ) had been reduced to non-toxic components in the mycelial-inoculated plots. It appears that the natural microbial community participates with the fungi to break down contaminants, eventually into carbon dioxide and water. Wood-degrading fungi are particularly effective in breaking down aromatic pollutants (toxic components of petroleum ), as well as chlorinated compounds (certain persistent pesticides; Battelle, 2000). Mycofiltration is a similar process, using fungal mycelia to filter toxic waste and microorganism s from water in soil. [ Advantages ] There are a number of cost/efficiency advantages to bioremediation, which can be employed in areas that are inaccessible without excavation. For example, hydrocarbon spills (specifically, petrol spills) or certain chlorinated solvents may contaminate groundwater, and introducing the appropriate electron acceptor or electron donor amendment, as appropriate, may significantly reduce contaminant concentration s after a long time allowing for acclimation. This is typically much less expensive than excavation followed by disposal elsewhere, incineration or other ex situ treatment strategies, and reduces or eliminates the need for &quot; pump and treat &quot;, a practice common at sites where hydrocarbons have contaminated clean groundwater. [ Monitoring bioremediation ] The process of bioremediation can be monitored indirectly by measuring the Oxidation Reduction Potential or redox in soil and groundwater, together with pH, temperature, oxygen content, electron acceptor/donor concentrations, and concentration of breakdown products (e.g. carbon dioxide ). This table shows the (decreasing) biological breakdown rate as function of the redox potential. Process Reaction  Redox potential (E h in mV )   aerobic : O 2 + 4e − + 4H + → 2H 2 O 600 ~ 400 anaerobic :     denitrification 2NO 3 − + 10e − + 12H + → N 2 + 6H 2 O 500 ~ 200     manganese IV reduction   MnO 2 + 2e − + 4H + → Mn 2 + + 2H 2 O     400 ~ 200 iron III reduction Fe(OH) 3 + e − + 3H + → Fe 2+ + 3H 2 O 300 ~ 100 sulfate reduction SO 4 2− + 8e − +10 H + → H 2 S + 4H 2 O 0 ~ −150 fermentation 2CH 2 O → CO 2 + CH 4 −150 ~ −220 This, by itself and at a single site, gives little information about the process of remediation. It is necessary to sample enough points on and around the contaminated site to be able to determine contours of equal redox potential. Contouring is usually done using specialised software, e.g. using Kriging interpolation. If all the measurements of redox potential show that electron acceptors have been used up, it is in effect an indicator for total microbial activity. Chemical analysis is also required to determine when the levels of contaminants and their breakdown products have been reduced to below regulatory limits. [ See also ] [ 3 ] Biodegradation Bioleaching Biosurfactant Dutch standards Folkewall List of environment topics Living machines Living wall Microbial biodegradation Mycoremediation Phytoremediation Pseudomonas putida (used for degrading oil) US Microbics Xenocatabolism [ References ] [ 2 ] [ External links ] Getting the microbes in touch with the contamination (Oakley 2012) Technology Focus on Bioremediation of Chlorinated Solvents Website hosted by the USEPA Technology Innovation Program &apos;&apos;&apos;Phytoremediation Website&apos;&apos;&apos; hosted by the Missouri Botanical Garden Removal of Cu2+ Ions from Aqueous Solutions Using Copper Resistant Bacteria (Rajeshkumar and Kartic 2011) Category:Biotechnology Category:Environmental soil science Category:Environmental engineering Category:Environmental terminology Category:Conservation projects Category:Ecological restoration Category:Soil contamination Category:Sustainable technologies ar:معالجة حيوية ca:Bioremediació cs:Bioremediace de:Bioremediation et:Biotervendus es:Biorremediación fa:زیست پالایی fr:Bioremédiation ko:생물적 환경정화 hi:जैवोपचारण id:Bioremediasi is:Lífhreinsun it:Biorisanamento ht:Byoremedyasyon ms:Biopemulihan nl:Bioremediatie ja:バイオレメディエーション pl:Bioremediacja pt:Biorremediação ru:Биоремедиация fi:Biopuhdistus uk:Біоремедіація