[ April 2009 ] [ Andrija Mohorovičić Mohorovicic - pametni deska Klementinum.jpg Detail of a commemorative plaque of Andria Mohorovičić in Clementinum, Prague, Czech Republic (unveiled in a ceremony on September 23, 2011) Volosko, Opatija, Croatia Croat meteorologist and seismologist eponym for the Mohorovičić discontinuity ] Andrija Mohorovičić ( [ ǎndrija moxorǒʋitʃitɕ hr ] ) (January 23, 1857 – December 18, 1936) was a Croatia n meteorologist and seismologist. He is best known for the eponym ous Mohorovičić discontinuity and is considered a founder of modern seismology. [ Early years ] The house in Volosko where Mohorovičić was born Mohorovičić was born in Volosko, Opatija, where his father (also named Andrija), was a blacksmith, making anchors. The younger Andrija also loved the sea and married a captain&apos;s daughter, Silvija Vernić. They had four sons. Mohorovičić obtained his elementary education in his home town, then continued at the gymnasium of neighbouring Rijeka. He received his higher education in mathematics and physics at the Faculty of Philosophy in Prague in 1875, where one of his professors was Ernst Mach. At 15, Mohorovičić knew Italian, English and French. Later he learned German, Latin and Ancient Greek. [ Career in education ] He taught first at high school in Zagreb (1879–1880), then at secondary school in Osijek. From 1882, he taught for nine years at the Royal Nautical School in Bakar, near Rijeka. Work started or completed there was important to his later scientific career. From 1893, when he became a corresponding member of the Faculty of Philosophy, University of Zagreb, to 1917-18 he taught in the fields of geophysics and astronomy. In 1898 he became a full member of what was then the Yugoslav Academy of Sciences and Arts in Zagreb, where he was a private docent. In 1910 he became titular associate university professor. [ Meteorology ] In Bakar he was first exposed to meteorology, which he taught at the Royal Nautical School. This influenced him to the extent that he founded the local meteorological station in 1887. He made systematic studies and both invented and constructed instruments to observe precipitation in Croatia and Slavonia. At his own request in 1891, he was transferred to the secondary school in Zagreb where, in 1892, where he soon became a head of the Meteorological Observatory in Grič and established a service for all Croatia, while teaching geophysics and astronomy at the university. On 13 March 1892, he observed the tornado in Novska, which picked up a 13 ton railway carriage with fifty passengers and threw it 30m. He observed also the &quot; vihor &quot; (whirlwind) near Čazma in 1898 and studied the climate in Zagreb. In his last paper on meteorology (1901), he discussed the decrease in atmospheric temperature with height. His observations of cloud s formed the basis of his doctoral thesis On the Observation of Clouds, the Daily and Annual Cloud Period in Bakar presented to the University of Zagreb and which earned him his degree as doctor of philosophy in 1893. [ Seismology ] On October 8, 1909 there was an earthquake with its epicentre in the Pokuplje region, 39  km southeast of Zagreb. A number of existing seismograph s were installed before and provided invaluable data upon which he made new discoveries. He concluded that when seismic waves strike the boundary between different types of material, they are reflected and refracted, just as light is when striking a prism, and that when earthquakes occur, two waves — longitudinal and transverse —propagate through the soil with different velocities. By analyzing data from more observation posts, Mohorovičić concluded that the Earth has several layers above a core. He was the first to establish, based on the evidence from seismic waves, the discontinuity that separates the Earth&apos;s crust from its mantle. This is now called the Mohorovičić discontinuity or (because of the complexity of that name) Moho. According to Mohorovičić, a layered structure would explain the observation of depths where seismic waves change speed and the difference in chemical composition between rocks from the crust and those from the mantle. From the data, he estimated the thickness of the upper layer (crust) to be 54  km. We know today that the crust is 5–9  km below the ocean floor and 25–60  km below the continent s, which are carried on tectonic plate s. Subsequent study of the Earth&apos;s interior confirmed the existence of the discontinuity under all continents and oceans. Mohorovičić&apos;s theories were visionary and were only truly understood many years later from detailed observations of the effects of earthquakes on buildings, deep focus earthquake s, locating earthquake epicenters, Earth models, seismographs, harnessing the energy of the wind, hail defence and other related elements of the geological body of knowledge known as geoscience. Mohorovičić retired in 1921. Crater Mohorovičić (on the Moon &apos;s far side) is named in his honour. A Gymnasium in Rijeka, Croatia and a school ship in the Croatian Navy are named after him, as was (in 1996) asteroid 8422 Mohorovičić. [ External links ] Prominent Istrians - Andrija Mohorovičić Croatian Geophysical Society Andrija Mohorovičić (1857-1936) at the Croatian Giants of Science http://geofizika-journal.gfz.hr/vol_24/No2/orlic.pdf [ Mohorovicic, Andrija Croatian seismologist and meteorologist January 23, 1857 Volosko, Opatija, Croatia December 18, 1936 ] Category:1857 births Category:1936 deaths Category:People from Opatija Category:Croatian scientists Category:Meteorologists Category:Seismologists Category:Rectors of the University of Zagreb Category:Members of the Croatian Academy of Sciences and Arts Category:Croatian Austro-Hungarians Category:People from Austrian Littoral Category:Burials at Mirogoj Cemetery [ hr ] ar:أندريا موهوروفيشيك bg:Андрия Мохоровичич bs:Andrija Mohorovičić ca:Andrija Mohorovičić cs:Andrija Mohorovičić de:Andrija Mohorovičić el:Άντριγια Μοχορόβιτσιτς es:Andrija Mohorovičić eu:Andrija Mohorovicic fr:Andrija Mohorovičić gl:Andrija Mohorovičić ko:안드리야 모호로비치치 hr:Andrija Mohorovičić it:Andrija Mohorovičić he:אנדריה מוהורוביצ&apos;יץ&apos; hu:Andrija Mohorovičić mk:Андрија Мохоровичиќ nl:Andrija Mohorovičić ja:アンドリア・モホロビチッチ pl:Andrija Mohorovičić pt:Andrija Mohorovičić ru:Мохоровичич, Андрей sq:Andrija Mohoroviçic sk:Andrija Mohorovičić sl:Andrija Mohorovičić sr:Андрија Мохоровичић sh:Andrija Mohorovičić tl:Andrija Mohorovičić uk:Мохоровичич Андрія zh:安德里亚·莫霍罗维奇