[ April 2009 ] Cyril Lionel Robert James (4 January 1901  – 19 May 1989), who sometimes wrote under the pen-name J.R. Johnson, was an Afro-Trinidadian historian, journalist, socialist theorist and essayist. His works are influential in various theoretical, social, and historiographical contexts. His work is a staple of subaltern studies, and he figures as a pioneering and influential voice in postcolonial literature. { Said, Edward. Culture and Imperialism, London: Chatto &amp; Windus, 1993, p. 54. } His work is often associated with Caribbean and Afro-nationalism, though James himself contended that the &quot; either-or &quot; was a false dichotomy, and that Caribbean peoples were indebted to Europe an as much as African cultural traditions. { Said, Edward. Culture and Imperialism. p. 247-8. } A tireless political activist, James&apos;s writing on the Communist International stirred debate in Trotskyist circles, and his history of the Haitian Revolution, The Black Jacobins, is a seminal text in the literature of the African Diaspora. { Segal, Ronald. The Black Diaspora, London: Faber, 1996, p. 275. } Characterized by one literary critic as an &quot; anti-Stalinist dialectician &quot;, { Said, Edward. Culture and Imperialism. p. 253. } James was known for his autodidactic facility, for his occasional playwriting and fiction, and as an avid sportsman. He is also famed as a writer on cricket. { Rosengarten: Urbane Revolutionary, p. 134. } [ Biography ] [ Early life ] Born in Trinidad and Tobago, then a British Crown colony, James attended Queen&apos;s Royal College, a high school in Port of Spain. He later worked as a schoolteacher, teaching among others the young Eric Williams, who later became the first Prime Minister of Trinidad and Tobago. Together with Ralph de Boissière, Albert Gomes and Alfred Mendes, James was a member of the anti-colonialist &quot; Beacon Group &quot;, a circle of writers associated with The Beacon magazine, in which he published a series of short stories. In 1932, he left Trinidad for the small town of Nelson in Lancashire, England, at the invitation of his friend, West Indian cricketer Learie Constantine, who needed his help writing his autobiography Cricket and I (published in 1933). During this time James took a job as cricket correspondent with the Manchester Guardian. [ London years ] In 1933 James moved to London, where he joined a Trotskyist group in 1934 that met to talk for hours in James&apos;s rented room. Remembering those times, group member Louise Cripps recalled, &quot; We felt our work could contribute to the time when we would see Socialism spreading... &quot; Cripps has described her intimate relationship with James in a memoir, C.L.R. James: Memories and Commentaries (1997). { Carol Polsgrove, Ending British Rule in Africa: Writers in a Common Cause (2009), pp. 24-25. } James had begun to campaign for the independence of the West Indies while in Trinidad, and his Life of Captain Cipriani and the pamphlet The Case for West-Indian Self Government were his first important published works. He became a champion of Pan-Africanism, and was named Chair of the International African Friends of Abyssinia, a group formed in 1935 in response to the Italian fascist invasion of Ethiopia ( Second Italo-Abyssinian War ). When the IAFE was transformed into the International African Service Bureau, James edited its journal, International African Opinion.The Bureau was led by his childhood friend George Padmore, who would be a driving force for socialist Pan-Africanism for several decades. Both Padmore and James wrote for the New Leader, published by the Independent Labour Party, which James joined, finding its anti-communist socialism compatible with his views. { Polsgrove, Ending British Rule, pp. 27, 35. } In this period, amid his frenetic political activity, James wrote a play about Toussaint L&apos;Ouverture, which was staged in the West End in 1936 and starred Paul Robeson and Robert Adams. That same year saw the publication in London of James&apos;s only novel, Minty Alley, which he had brought with him in manuscript from Trinidad. It was the first novel to be published by a black Caribbean author in the UK. He also wrote what are perhaps his best-known works of non-fiction: World Revolution (1937), a history of the rise and fall of the Communist International, which was critically praised by Leon Trotsky; and The Black Jacobins: Toussaint L&apos;Ouverture and the San Domingo Revolution (1938), a widely acclaimed history of the Haitian Revolution, which would later be seen as a seminal text in the study of the African diaspora. He went to Paris to research this work, where he met Alfred Auguste Nemours. In 1936, James and his Trotskyist Marxist Group left the Independent Labour Party to form an open party. In 1938, this new group took part in several mergers to form the Revolutionary Socialist League (RSL). The RSL was a highly factionalized organization. When James was invited to tour the United States by the leadership of the Socialist Workers&apos; Party (SWP), then the US section of the Fourth International, to facilitate its work among black workers, John Archer encouraged him to leave in the hope of removing a rival. [ June 2008 ] James&apos;s relationship with Louise Cripps had broken up after her second abortion, so that intimate tie no longer bound him to England. { Polsgrove, Ending British Rule, p. 34. } [ US career and the Johnson-Forest Tendency ] James travelled to the USA in late 1938, and after a tour sponsored by the SWP, he stayed until he was deported in 1953. By 1940 he had begun to doubt Trotsky&apos;s view of the Soviet Union as a degenerated workers state. He left the SWP along with Max Shachtman, who formed the Workers&apos; Party (WP). Within the WP, James formed the Johnson-Forest Tendency with Raya Dunayevskaya (his pseudonym was Johnson and Dunayevskaya&apos;s was Forest) and Grace Lee (later Grace Lee Boggs ) to spread their views within the new party. While within the WP, the views of the Johnson-Forest Tendency underwent considerable development. By the end of the Second World War, they had definitively rejected Trotsky&apos;s theory of Russia as a degenerated workers state. Instead they classified it as state capitalist. This political evolution was shared by other Trotskyists of their generation, most notably Tony Cliff. Unlike Cliff, the Johnson-Forest Tendency was focusing increasingly on the liberation movements of oppressed minorities, a theoretical development already visible in James&apos;s thought in his 1939 discussions with Trotsky. Such liberation struggles came to take centre stage for the Johnson-Forest Tendency. After World War II, the WP witnessed a downturn in revolutionary sentiment. The J-F Tendency, on the other hand, was encouraged by the prospects for revolutionary change for oppressed peoples. After a few short months as an independent group, during which time they published a great deal of material, in 1947 the Johnson-Forest Tendency joined the SWP, which it regarded as more proletarian than the WP. James would still describe himself as a Leninist, despite his rejection of Lenin &apos;s conception of the vanguard role of the revolutionary party. He argued for socialists to support the emerging black nationalist movements. By 1949, James rejected the idea of a vanguard party. This led the Johnson-Forest Tendency to leave the Trotskyist movement and rename itself the Correspondence Publishing Committee. In 1955 after James had left for England, about half the membership of the Committee withdrew, under the leadership of Raya Dunayevskaya, to form a separate tendency of Marxist-humanism and found the organization News and Letters Committees. Whether Dunayevskaya&apos;s faction had constituted a majority or a minority in the Correspondence Publishing Committee remains a matter of dispute. Historian Kent Worcester claims that Dunayevskaya&apos;s supporters formed a majority, but Martin Glaberman claims in New Politics that the faction loyal to James had a majority. { Glaberman, Martin, &quot; C. L. R. James: A Recollection &quot;, New Politics #8 (Winter 1990), pp.  78–84. } The Committee split again in 1962, as Grace Lee Boggs and James Boggs, two key activists, left to pursue a more Third Worldist approach. The remaining Johnsonites, including leading member Martin Glaberman, reconstituted themselves as Facing Reality. James advised the group from Great Britain until it dissolved in 1970, against his urging. [ June 2008 ] James&apos;s writings were also influential in the development of Autonomist Marxism as a current within Marxist thought. He himself saw his life&apos;s work as developing the theory and practice of Leninism. [ June 2008 ] [ London years, again ] In 1953, James was forced to leave the USA under threat of deportation for having overstayed his visa. In his attempt to remain in America, James wrote a study of Herman Melville, Mariners, Renegades and Castaways: The Story of Herman Melville and the World We Live In, and had copies of the privately published work sent to every member of the Senate. He wrote the book while being detained on Ellis Island. In an impassioned letter to his old friend George Padmore, James said that in Mariners he was using Moby Dick as a parable for the anti-communism sweeping the United States—a consequence, he thought, of Americans&apos; uncritical faith in capitalism. { Polsgrove, Ending British Rule, p. 129. } Returning to England, James appeared to Padmore and his partner Dorothy Pizer to be a man adrift. After James started reporting on cricket for the Manchester Guardian, Padmore wrote American novelist Richard Wright, &quot; That will take him out of his ivory tower and making his paper revolution.... &quot; &apos; { Polsgrove, Ending British Rule, p. 130. } Grace Lee Boggs, a colleague from the Detroit group came to London in 1954 to work with him, but she, too, saw him &quot; at loose ends, trying to find his way after fifteen years out of the country. &quot; { Grace Lee Boggs, Living for Change (1998), p. 69. } In 1957, James traveled to Ghana for the celebration of its independence from British rule. He had met Ghana&apos;s new head of state, Kwame Nkrumah, in the United States when Nkrumah was studying there and sent him on to work with George Padmore in London after World War II; Padmore was by this point a close Nkrumah advisor and had written The Gold Coast Revolution (1953). Writing from Ghana in 1957, James told American friends that Nkrumah thought he, too, ought to write a book on the Convention Peoples Party, which under Nkrumah&apos;s leadership had brought the country to independence. The book would show how the party&apos;s strategies could be used to build a new African future. James invited Grace Lee Boggs, his colleague from Detroit, to join in the work, though in the end, James wrote Nkrumah and the Ghana Revolution on his own. It was not published until 1977, after Nkrumah&apos;s overthrow, exile and subsequent death. { Polsgrove, Ending British Rule, pp. 155-6. } [ Trinidad and return to Britain ] In 1958 James went back to Trinidad, where he edited The Nation newspaper for the pro-independence People&apos;s National Movement (PNM) party. He also became active again in the Pan-African movement. He believed that the Ghana revolution greatly encouraged anti-colonialist revolutionary struggle. James also advocated the West Indies Federation. It was over this issue that he fell out with the PNM leadership. He returned to Great Britain. In 1968 he was invited to the USA, where he taught at the University of the District of Columbia. Ultimately returning to Britain, he spent his last years in Brixton, London. In the 1980s, he was awarded an Honorary Doctorate from South Bank Polytechnic (later to become University of the South Bank, in London) for his body of socio-political work, including that relating to race and sport. James died in London on 19 May 1989. [ Personal life ] James married his first wife, Juanita Young, in Trinidad in 1929, but his move three years later to Britain led to their estrangement. James met his second wife, Constance Webb (1918–2005), an American model, actor and author, after he moved to the USA in 1938; they married in 1946 and were divorced in 1953, when James was deported to England. He and Webb had a son, C. L. R. James, Jr, familiarly known as Nobbie. { [[Caryl Phillips ], &quot; Obituary: Constance Webb, Writer wife of CLR James &quot;, } { The Guardian, 15 April 2005.] } In 1956 James married Selma Weinstein (née Deitch), who had been a young member of the Johnson-Forest Tendency; they remained close political colleagues for more than 25 years. [ Legacy ] In the 1970s and 1980s, a number of titles by James were published by Allison &amp; Busby, including four volumes of selected writings: The Future In the Present, Spheres of Existence, At the Rendezvous of Victory, and Cricket. In 1983, a 60-minute British film, Talking History, featuring James in dialogue with the historian E. P. Thompson was made by Penumbra Productions, which company also filmed a series of six lectures by James, shown on Channel 4. The topics were: Shakespeare; Cricket; American society; Solidarity in Poland; the Caribbean; and Africa. BFI Film &amp; TV Database The C.L.R. James Institute was founded with James&apos;s blessing by Jim Murray in 1983. Based in New York, and affiliated to the Centre for African Studies at Cambridge University, it has been run by Ralph Dumain since Murray&apos;s death in 2003. The C.L.R. James Institute A public library in the London Borough of Hackney was named in his honour on 29 March 1985, when James attended the library’s naming ceremony, CLR James Library and his widow, Selma James, attended a reception there to mark its 20th anniversary in 2005. Hackney Council had intended to drop the name of the library as part of a new development in Dalston Square in the spring of 2011, but after protests from Selma James and local and international campaigners, the council promised that the library would after all retain the name of C. L. R. James. A council statement said: “As part of the new library, there will be a permanent exhibition to chronicle his life and works and an annual event in his memory, and we are pleased to report the state-of-the-art education room will also be named after this influential figure.” &quot; Black Hero Dropped by Hackney &quot;, Loving Dalston, 19 February 2010. Eloise Horsfield, &quot; Hackney Council signals U-turn in CLR James library row &quot;, &apos;&apos;Hackney Citizen&apos;&apos;, 8 October 2010. The new Dalston C. L. R. James Library was officially opened on 28 February 2012. &quot; Celebrations for the New Dalston C.L.R James Library Reach Fever Pitch &quot;, Hackney Council, 1 March 2012. Ændrew Rininsland, &quot; New Dalston CLR James library opens &quot;, Hackney Citizen, 1 March 2012. At the launch there on 2 March 2012 of a permanent exhibition dedicated to James&apos;s life and legacy, Selma James spoke. BEMA Network. Retrieved 16 March 2012. The Brixton Pound, a currency in use in Brixton only and created in an effort to keep money local and support local and independent traders, has a picture of C.L.R. James on the ten-pound note. [ Writings on cricket ] [ Beyond a Boundary ] C. L. R. James is widely known as a writer on cricket, especially for his autobiographical 1963 book, Beyond a Boundary. This is considered the seminal work on the game, and is often named as the best single book on cricket (or even the best book on any sport) ever written. { Rosengarten: Urbane Revolutionary, p. 134. } The book&apos;s key question, frequently quoted by modern journalists and essayists, is inspired by Rudyard Kipling and asks: &quot; What do they know of cricket who only cricket know? &quot; James uses this challenge as the basis for describing cricket in an historical and social context, the strong influence cricket had on his life, and how it meshed with his role in politics and his understanding of issues of class and race. The literary quality of the writing attracts cricketers of all political views. While editor of The Nation, he led the successful campaign in 1960 to have Frank Worrell appointed the first black captain of the West Indies cricket team. James believed that the relationship between players and the public was a prominent reason behind the West Indies&apos; achieving so much with so little. [ Select Bibliography ] &apos;&apos;Letters from London&apos;&apos; (series of essays written in 1932). Signal Books (2003). The Life of Captain Cipriani: An Account of British Government in the West Indies. Nelson, Lancs.: Cartmel &amp; Co. (1932). The Case for West-Indian Self-Government. London: Hogarth Press (1933). Reprinted, New York: University Place Bookshop (1967); Detroit: Facing Reality Publishing Co. (1967) Minty Alley. London: Secker &amp; Warburg (1936). New edition, London &amp; Port of Spain: New Beacon Books (1971). Toussaint L&apos;Ouverture (play). Produced by Peter Godfrey at the Westminster Theatre, London (1936). &apos;&apos;World Revolution 1917-1936: The Rise and Fall of the Communist International&apos;&apos;. London: Secker &amp; Warburg (1937). A History of Negro Revolt. Fact monograph no. 18, London (1938). Revised as A History of Pan-African Revolt. Washington: Drum and Spear Press (1969). The Black Jacobins : Toussaint L&apos;Ouverture and the San Domingo Revolution. London: Secker &amp; Warburg (1938). Revised edition, New York: Vintage Books/Random House (1963). ISBN 0-679-72467-2. Index starts at p.  419. Library of Congress Card Number: 63-15043. New British edition with Foreword, London: Allison &amp; Busby (1980). &apos;&apos;Why Negroes should oppose the war&apos;&apos; (as &quot; J. R. Johnson &quot; ) New York: Pioneer Publishers for the Socialist Workers Party and the Young People&apos;s Socialist League (Fourth International (1939). &apos;&apos;My friends: a fireside chat on the war&apos;&apos; (as &quot; Native Son &quot; ) New York: Workers Party (1940). The Invading Socialist Society (with F. Forest and Ria Stone). New York: Johnson Forest Tendency (1947). Reprinted with new preface, Detroit: Bewick Editions (1972). &apos;&apos;Notes on Dialectics: Hegel, Marx and Lenin&apos;&apos; (Link only goes to the last half of Part 2 from the 1980 edition) (1948). New edition with Introduction, London: Allison &amp; Busby; Westport, Conn.: Lawrence Hill (1980). Notes on American Civilisation. Typescript [1950], Published as American Civilization, Oxford: Blackwell (1992). &apos;&apos;State Capitalism and World Revolution&apos;&apos; (1950). New edition with foreword by James and introduction by Paul Buhle, Chicago: Charles H. Kerr (1986). Mariners, Renegades and Castaways: The Story of Herman Melville and the World We Live In. New York: privately printed (1953). Reprinted, London: Allison &amp; Busby (1984). &apos;&apos;Facing Reality&apos;&apos; (with Cornelius Castoriadis and Grace Lee Boggs) Detroit: Correspondence (1958). Modern Politics (A series of lectures on the subject given at the Trinidad Public library, in its Adult Education Programme). Port of Spain: PNM Publishing Co.(1960). A convention appraisal: Dr. Eric Williams: first premier of Trinidad &amp; Tobago: a biographical sketch. Port-of-Spain, Trinidad: PNM Publishing Co. (1960). Party Politics in the West Indies. San Juan, Port of Spain: Vedic Enterprises (1962). &apos;&apos;Marxism and the intellectuals&apos;&apos; Detroit, Facing Reality Publishing Committee (1962). Beyond a Boundary. London: Stanley Paul/Hutchinson (1963). New edition, New York: Pantheon (1984). Kas-kas; interviews with three Caribbean writers in Texas. George Lamming, C. L. R. James [and] Wilson Harris. Austin, TX: African and Afro-American Research Institute, University of Texas at Austin (1972). Not For Sale (with Michael Manley ). San Francisco: Editorial Consultants (1976). Nkrumah and the Ghana Revolution. London: Allison &amp; Busby; Westport, Conn.: L. Hill (1977). The Future in the Present, Selected Writings, vol. 1. London: Allison &amp; Busby; Westport, Conn.: Lawrence Hill (1977). Spheres of Existence, Selected Writings, vol. 2. London: Allison &amp; Busby; Westport, Conn.: L. Hill (1980). 80th Birthday Lectures (ed. Margaret Busby and Darcus Howe ). London: Race Today Publications (1983). At the Rendezvous of Victory, Selected Writings, vol. 3. London: Allison &amp; Busby (1984). Cricket (selected writings, ed. Anna Grimshaw). London: Allison &amp; Busby; distributed in the USA by Schocken Books (1986). [ Further reading ] Boggs, Grace Lee. Living for Change: An Autobiography. Minneapolis, London: University of Minnesota Press, 1998. Bogues, Anthony, Caliban&apos;s Freedom: The Early Political Thought of C. L. R. James. London: Pluto Press, 1997. [ University Press of Mississippi, 2007 87-7289-096-7 ] Buhle, Paul, C. L. R. James. The Artist as Revolutionary. London: Verso, 1988. Buhle, Paul (ed.), C. L. R. James: His Life and Work. London: Allison &amp; Busby, 1986. Cripps, Louise. C.L.R. James: Memories and Commentaries. London: Cornwall Books, 1997. Dhondy, Farrukh, C. L. R. James: Cricket, the Caribbean and World Revolution. London: Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson, 2001. Glaberman, Martin, Marxism for our Times: C. L. R. James on Revolutionary Organization, University Press of Mississippi, 1999. McClendon III, John H., C. L. R. James&apos;s Notes on Dialectics: Left Hegelianism or Marxism-Leninism?. Lanham, MD: Lexington Books, 2004. McLemee, Scott &amp; Paul LeBlanc (eds), C. L. R. James and Revolutionary Marxism: Selected Writings of C. L. R. James 1939-1949. Prometheus Books, 1994. Polsgrove, Carol. Ending British Rule in Africa: Writers in a Common Cause. Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2009. Renton, David, C.L.R. James: Cricket&apos;s Philosopher King, Haus Publishers, 2008. Rosengarten, Frank, Urbane Revolutionary: C. L. R. James and the Struggle for a New Society Webb, Constance, Not Without Love: Memoirs. Hanover, NH: University Press of New England, 2003. Worcester, Kent, C. L. R. James. A Political Biography. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 1996. Young, James D., The World of C. L. R. James. The Unfragmented Vision. Glasgow: Clydeside Press, 1999. [ References ] [ External links ] The C.L.R. James Legacy Project The C.L.R. James Institute C L R James Archive &apos;&apos;Urgent Tasks&apos;&apos; - Number 12 &quot; C. L. R. James: His Life and Work &quot; CLR James Archive at libcom.org &quot; On Karl Marx and the 75th Anniversary of the Paris Commune &quot; &quot; A Controversial Caribbean: C. L. R. James &quot; &quot; C. L. R. James and the virtues of spontaneity &quot;, in Trotskyism by Alex Callinicos &quot; C. L. R. James: the revolutionary as artist &quot;, International Socialism 112 (2006) &quot; Revolution as a New Beginning &quot; : an Interview with Grace Lee Boggs. Autonomy &amp; Solidarity. Aidan. April 1, 2005 - 7:08pm. Retrieved April 15, 2005. Longtime associate of C. L. R. James discusses their work and her later career. [ James, Cyril L 4 January 1901 19 May 1989 ] Category:1901 births Category:1989 deaths Category:American Trotskyists Category:American communists Category:American Marxists Category:American historians Category:American people of Trinidad and Tobago descent Category:Anti-racism activists Category:British Trotskyists Category:Cricket historians and writers Category:British communists Category:British Marxists Category:British historians Category:English people of Trinidad and Tobago descent Category:The Guardian journalists Category:Historians of the Caribbean Category:Historians of colonialism Category:Marxist historians Category:Marxist humanists Category:Marxist journalists Category:Marxist theorists Category:Pan-Africanism Category:University of the District of Columbia faculty Category:Trinidad and Tobago communists Category:Trinidad and Tobago historians Category:Trinidad and Tobago emigrants to the United Kingdom Category:Trinidad and Tobago trade unionists Category:Trinidad and Tobago writers Category:People deported from the United States Category:Members of the Workers Party (U.S.) Category:Black British writers Category:African American writers Category:Historians of slavery de:Cyril Lionel Robert James fa:کی‌ال‌آر جیمز fr:Cyril Lionel Robert James it:Cyril Lionel Robert James ja:C・L・R・ジェームズ ru:Джеймс, Сирил fi:C. L. R. James sv:C. L. R. James yo:C. L. R. James