[ 1936 5 9 y ] { Salford, } { Lancashire, } { England, UK } { Actor } { 1958 –present } { Jane Wenham (1957 –61) } { Anouk Aimée (1970 –78) Pene Delmage (2006 –present) } { Simon } Albert Finney (born 9 May 1936) is an English actor. He achieved prominence in films in the early 1960s, and has maintained a successful career in theatre, film and television. A recipient of BAFTA, Golden Globe, Emmy and Screen Actors Guild Award s, Finney has been nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actor four times, for Tom Jones (1963), Murder on the Orient Express (1974), The Dresser (1983), and Under the Volcano (1984); and was nominated for Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor for his performance in Erin Brockovich (2000). [ Career ] Finney is a graduate of the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art and a member of the Royal Shakespeare Company. His career began in the theatre; he made his first appearance on the London stage in 1958 in Jane Arden &apos;s The Party, directed by Charles Laughton, who starred in the production along with his wife, Elsa Lanchester. Then in 1959 he appeared at Stratford in Coriolanus opposite Laurence Olivier (as Coriolanus), Edith Evans and Vanessa Redgrave. { Laurence Olivier, Confessions of an Actor,Orion, 1994, p243 } His first film appearance was a role in Tony Richardson &apos;s The Entertainer (1960), with Laurence Olivier, but he made his breakthrough with his portrayal of a disillusioned factory worker in Karel Reisz &apos;s film version of Alan Sillitoe &apos;s Saturday Night and Sunday Morning. This led to a series of &quot; Angry Young Man &quot; roles in kitchen sink drama s, before he starred in the Academy Award -winning 1963 film Tom Jones. Prior to this, Finney had been chosen to play T. E. Lawrence in David Lean &apos;s production of Lawrence of Arabia, but the actor quit after four days of shooting. { &quot; David Lean &quot; by Stephen M. Silverman (Abrams, New York, 1992) } After Charlie Bubbles (1968), which he also directed, his film appearances became less frequent as he focused more on acting on stage. During this period, one of his high-profile film roles was as Agatha Christie &apos;s Belgian master detective Hercule Poirot in the 1974 film Murder On The Orient Express. Finney became so well known for the role that he complained that it typecast him for a number of years. &quot; People really do think I am 300 pounds with a French accent &quot; he said. While being known for his dramatic roles, Finney appeared and sang in two musical films: Scrooge and the Hollywood film version of Annie, which was directed by John Huston, who would direct him once again in Under The Volcano two years later. He also sings in Tim Burton &apos;s Corpse Bride. Finney made several television productions for the BBC in the 1990s, including &apos;&apos;The Green Man&apos;&apos; (1990), based on a story by Kingsley Amis, the acclaimed drama A Rather English Marriage (1998) (with Tom Courtenay ), and the lead role in Dennis Potter &apos;s final two plays, Karaoke and Cold Lazarus in 1996 and 1997. In the latter he played a frozen, disembodied head. Finney also made an appearance at Roger Waters &apos; The Wall Concert in Berlin, where he played &quot; The Judge &quot; during the performance of &quot; The Trial &quot;. In 2002 his critically acclaimed portrayal of Winston Churchill in The Gathering Storm won him BAFTA and Emmy awards as Best Actor. He also played the title role in the television series My Uncle Silas, based on the short stories by H. E. Bates, about a roguish but lovable poacher-cum-farm labourer looking after his great-nephew. The show ran for two series from 2000 until 2003. A lifelong supporter of Manchester United, Finney narrated the documentary Munich, about the aircrash that killed most of the Busby Babes in 1958, which was shown on United&apos;s TV channel MUTV in February 2008. { timesonline.co.uk } [ June 2011 ] [ Personal life ] Finney was born in Pendleton, Salford, Lancashire, to Alice Hobson and Albert Finney, Sr., a bookmaker. [ Albert Finney Biography http://www.filmreference.com/film/2/Albert-Finney.html filmreference 2008 2009-01-22 ] He was educated at Tootal Drive Primary School, Salford Grammar School and the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art. [ 1993 Quentin Falk 0-86051-823-X Albert Finney in Character: A Biography Robson Books ] He has a son by his first wife, Jane Wenham : Simon, who works in the film business as a camera operator. From 1970 to 1978 he was married to French actress Anouk Aimée. [ Awards and honors ] Albert Finney turned down the offer of a CBE in 1980 and a Knighthood in 2000. He has criticised the honours system for &quot; perpetuating snobbery &quot;. { &quot; Revealed: secret list of 300 who scorned honours &quot;, } { The Sunday Times, 21 December 2003 } He has five Oscar nominations but has never won. He was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actor four times, for Tom Jones (1963), Murder on the Orient Express (1974), The Dresser (1983), and Under the Volcano (1984); and was nominated for Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor for his performance in Erin Brockovich (2000). Julia Roberts mentioned Albert Finney in her Oscar acceptance speech for Best Actress in Erin Brockovich, thanking him and sharing the Oscar with him. Finney received a BAFTA award for Most Promising Newcomer to Leading Film Roles in 1961 for Saturday Night and Sunday Morning (1960). He was also nominated for Best British Actor for the same film. He was nominated nine more times before he finally won again, for the telefilm The Gathering Storm (2002). He has 13 BAFTA nominations in total, and also received a BAFTA Fellowship in 2001. He won an Emmy Award, for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Miniseries or Made for TV Movie, for his performance as Winston Churchill in HBO &apos;s The Gathering Storm. He had previously been nominated for the HBO telefilm The Image (1990). He has received Golden Globe nominations for: Best Actor in a Motion Picture - Drama Shoot the Moon The Dresser Under the Volcano Best Actor in a Motion Picture - Comedy/Musical &apos;&apos; Tom Jones (he received two nominations, winning for &quot; Most Promising Newcomer &quot;. See below.) Scrooge, WINNER. His portrayal of both the old miser and the young Ebenezer Scrooge earned him &quot; The Best Motion Picture Actor in a Musical/Comedy &quot; for 1971. Best Supporting Actor in a Motion Picture Erin Brockovich Big Fish Best Performance by an Actor in a Mini-Series or a Motion Picture Made for Television The Gathering Storm, WINNER. Most Promising Newcomer - Male. Tom Jones, WINNER. For his work on Broadway, Finney has been nominated for two Tony Awards, both for Best Actor in a Play, for Luther in 1964, and A Day in the Death of Joe Egg in 1968. For the London stage, he won two Olivier Awards, both for Best Actor, for A Flea in Her Ear and &apos;&apos;Orphans&apos;&apos;. Other awards include: a Golden Laurel for his work on Scrooge (1970) and for his work on Tom Jones, for which he was the 3rd Place Winner for the &quot; Top Male Comedy Performance &quot; for 1964. He was honoured by the Los Angeles Film Critics&apos; Association as Best Actor for Under the Volcano (which he tied with F. Murray Abraham for Amadeus ), the National Board of Review Best Actor award for Saturday Night and Sunday Morning, and the New York Film Critics&apos; Circle Best Actor award for Tom Jones. Finney has won two Screen Actors&apos; Guild Awards, for Best Performance by a Male Actor in a Supporting Role, for Erin Brockovich, and as a member of the acting ensemble in the film Traffic. He was also nominated for The Gathering Storm, for Best Performance by a Male Actor in a Television Movie or Miniseries, but did not win. He won the Silver Berlin Bear award for Best Actor, for The Dresser, at the 34th Berlin International Film Festival in 1984. [ http://www.berlinale.de/en/archiv/jahresarchive/1984/03_preistr_ger_1984/03_Preistraeger_1984.html Berlinale: 1984 Prize Winners 2010-11-26 berlinale.de ] He won the Volpi Cup for Best Actor, for Tom Jones, at the Venice Film Festival. [ Filmography ] Year Film Role Notes 1960 The Entertainer Mick Rice 1960 Saturday Night and Sunday Morning Arthur Seaton BAFTA Award for Most Promising Newcomer National Board of Review Award for Best Actor Nominated — BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role 1963 Tom Jones Tom Jones Golden Globe Award for Most Promising Newcomer New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actor Volpi Cup Nominated — Academy Award for Best Actor Nominated — BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role Nominated — Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy 1964 Night Must Fall Danny 1967 Two for the Road Mark Wallace 1968 Charlie Bubbles Charlie Bubbles Also director 1970 Scrooge Ebenezer Scrooge Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy 1971 Gumshoe Eddie Ginley Nominated — BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role 1974 Murder on the Orient Express Hercule Poirot Evening Standard British Film Award for Best Actor Nominated — Academy Award for Best Actor Nominated — BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role 1975 The Adventure of Sherlock Holmes&apos; Smarter Brother Man In Opera Audience Uncredited Cameo 1977 The Duellists Fouche 1981 Looker Dr. Larry Roberts Wolfen Dewey Wilson Nominated — Saturn Award for Best Actor Loophole Daniels 1982 Annie Daddy Warbucks Shoot the Moon George Dunlap Nominated — BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role Nominated — Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Drama 1983 The Dresser Sir Silver Bear for Best Actor Nominated — Academy Award for Best Actor Nominated — BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role Nominated — Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Drama 1984 Under the Volcano Geoffrey Firmin Los Angeles Film Critics Association Award for Best Actor London Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actor Nominated — Academy Award for Best Actor Nominated — Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Drama 1987 Orphans Harold 1990 The Image Jason Cromwell Nominated — Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor - Mini-series/Film The Green Man Maurice Allington Nominated — British Academy Television Award for Best Actor Miller&apos;s Crossing Leo O&apos;Bannon Roger Waters - The Wall (Live in Berlin) The Judge 1992 The Playboys Hegarty 1993 Rich in Love Warren Odom 1994 The Browning Version Andrew Crocker-Harris Boston Society of Film Critics Award for Best Actor A Man of No Importance Alfred Byrne 1996 Nostromo Dr. Monyghan 1997 Washington Square Dr. Austin Sloper 1999 Breakfast of Champions Kilgore Trout 2000 Erin Brockovich Ed Masry Dallas-Fort Worth Film Critics Association Award for Best Supporting Actor London Film Critics&apos; Circle Award for British Supporting Actor of the Year Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Supporting Role Nominated — Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor Nominated — BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Supporting Role Nominated — Chicago Film Critics Association Award for Best Supporting Actor Nominated — Chlotrudis Award for Best Supporting Actor Nominated — Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor – Motion Picture Nominated — Las Vegas Film Critics Society Award for Best Supporting Actor Nominated — Online Film Critics Society Award for Best Supporting Actor Nominated — Satellite Award for Best Supporting Actor - Motion Picture Traffic White House Chief of Staff Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Cast in a Motion Picture 2002 The Gathering Storm Winston Churchill British Academy Television Award for Best Actor Broadcasting Press Guild Award for Best Actor Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor - Mini-series/Film Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Miniseries or Television Film Nominated — Satellite Award for Best Actor – Miniseries or Television Film Nominated — Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Miniseries or Television Movie 2003 Big Fish older Edward Bloom Nominated — BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Supporting Role Nominated — Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor – Motion Picture Nominated — Saturn Award for Best Actor 2004 Ocean&apos;s Twelve Gaspar LeMarque ( uncredited ) 2005 Tim Burton&apos;s Corpse Bride Finis Everglot ( voice ) 2006 A Good Year Uncle Henry Skinner Amazing Grace John Newton 2007 The Bourne Ultimatum Dr. Albert Hirsch Before the Devil Knows You&apos;re Dead Charles Hanson Gotham Award for Best Ensemble Cast Nominated — London Film Critics&apos; Circle Award for British Supporting Actor of the Year 2012 The Bourne Legacy Dr. Albert Hirsch Post-Production Skyfall Kincade Post-Production [ References ] Notes [ External links ] [ 40532 ] [ 0001215 ] [ 62063 ] [ 451331 ] [ Finney, Albert actor 9 May 1936 Pendleton, Salford, Lancashire, UK ] Category:Alumni of the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art Category:BAFTA winners (people) Category:Best Musical or Comedy Actor Golden Globe (film) winners Category:Emmy Award winners Category:Best Miniseries or Television Movie Actor Golden Globe winners Category:English actors Category:English film actors Category:English stage actors Category:English television actors Category:English voice actors Category:English film directors Category:English film producers Category:Laurence Olivier Award winners Category:Outstanding Performance by a Cast in a Motion Picture Screen Actors Guild Award winners Category:People from Salford, Greater Manchester Category:Royal National Theatre Company members Category:Hercule Poirot Category:1936 births Category:Living people Category:People educated at Salford Grammar School Category:Volpi Cup winners an:Albert Finney cs:Albert Finney da:Albert Finney de:Albert Finney es:Albert Finney eu:Albert Finney fr:Albert Finney id:Albert Finney it:Albert Finney he:אלברט פיני la:Albertus Finney hu:Albert Finney nl:Albert Finney ja:アルバート・フィニー no:Albert Finney pl:Albert Finney pt:Albert Finney ro:Albert Finney ru:Финни, Альберт sr:Алберт Фини sh:Albert Finney fi:Albert Finney sv:Albert Finney tl:Albert Finney tr:Albert Finney zh:亞伯特·芬尼