{ solar-power ed scientific calculator from the 1980s using a single-line display } { Casio FX-991ES, a scientific calculator (2005) with a dot matrix display } The TI-84 Plus: A typical graphing calculator by Texas Instruments practical use of a calculator practical use of a calculator A scientific calculator is a type of electronic calculator, usually but not always handheld, designed to calculate problems in science, engineering, and mathematics. They have almost completely replaced slide rule s in almost all traditional applications, and are widely used in both education and professional settings. In certain contexts such as higher education, scientific calculators have been superseded by graphing calculator s, which offer a superset of scientific calculator functionality along with the ability to graph input data and write and store programs for the device. There is also some overlap with the financial calculator market. [ Functions ] Modern scientific calculators generally have many more features than a standard four or five-function calculator, and the feature set differs between manufacturers and models; however, the defining features of a scientific calculator include: scientific notation floating point arithmetic logarithm ic functions, using both base 10 and base e trigonometric functions (some including hyperbolic trigonometry ) exponential functions and root s beyond the square root quick access to constants such as pi and e In addition, high-end scientific calculators will include: hexadecimal, binary, and octal calculations, including basic Boolean math complex number s fraction s statistics and probability calculations programmability — see Programmable calculator equation solving calculus conversion of units physical constants While most scientific models have traditionally used a single-line display similar to traditional pocket calculators, many of them have at the very least more digits (10 to 12), sometimes with extra digits for the floating point exponent. A few have multi-line displays, with some recent models from Hewlett-Packard, Texas Instruments, Casio, Sharp, and Canon using dot matrix displays similar to those found on graphing calculator s. [ Uses ] Scientific calculators are used widely in any situation where quick access to certain mathematical functions is needed, especially those such as trigonometric functions that were once traditionally looked up in tables; they are also used in situations requiring back-of-the-envelope calculations of very large numbers, as in some aspects of astronomy, physics, and chemistry. They are very often required for math classes from the junior high school level through college, and are generally either permitted or required on many standardized test s covering math and science subjects; as a result, many are sold into educational markets to cover this demand, and some high-end models include features making it easier to translate the problem on a textbook page into calculator input, from allowing explicit operator precedence using parentheses to providing a method for the user to enter an entire problem in as it is written on the page using simple formatting tools. [ History ] The first scientific calculator that included all of the basic features above was the programmable Hewlett-Packard HP-9100A, { HP-9100A/B at hpmuseum.org } released in 1968, though the Wang LOCI-2 and the Mathatronics Mathatron had some features later identified with scientific calculator designs. The HP-9100 series was built entirely from discrete transistor logic with no integrated circuit s, and was one of the first uses of the CORDIC algorithm for trigonometric computation in a personal computing device, as well as the first calculator based on reverse Polish notation entry. HP became closely identified with RPN calculators from then on, and even today some of their high-end calculators (particularly the long-lived HP-12C financial calculator and the HP-48 series of graphing calculators) still offer RPN as their default input mode due to having garnered a very large following. The HP-35, introduced on February 1, 1972, was Hewlett-Packard &apos;s first pocket calculator and the world&apos;s first handheld scientific calculator. { HP-35 Scientific Calculator Awarded IEEE Milestone } Like some of HP&apos;s desktop calculators it used reverse Polish notation. Introduced at US$395, the HP-35 was available from 1972 to 1975. HP continues to develop and market high-end scientific calculators, like the HP-35s and HP-49 series, which have been favored by scientists and engineers, in labs, offices, as well as in the field. In 1974, HP had the HP-65, which could be programmable. { http://books.google.com/books?id=ndQDAAAAMBAJ &amp; printsec=frontcover &amp; source=gbs_ge_summary_r &amp; cad=0#v=onepage &amp; q &amp; f=false } Texas Instruments, after the introduction of several units with scientific notation, came out with a handheld scientific calculator on January 15, 1974 in the form of the SR-50. { SR-50 page at datamath.org } TI continues to be a major player in the calculator market, with their long-running TI-30 series being one of the most widely used scientific calculators in classrooms. Casio and Sharp have also been major players, with Casio&apos;s FX series (beginning with the Casio FX-1 in 1972 { Casio FX-1 Desktop Scientific Calculator } ) being a very common brand, used particularly in schools. Casio is also the #3 [ April 2010 ] player in the graphing calculator market, and was the first company to produce one ( Casio fx-7000G ). [ See also ] Formula calculator Graphing calculator [ References ] [ External links ] The Old Calculator Web Museum Programmable calculators – Specifications and descriptions of many programmable and scientific calculators The Museum of HP Calculators Datamath.org, a Texas Instruments handheld calculator museum Online Scientific Calculator Javascript calculator program with source code Soviet Calculators Collection Online Calculators Category:Calculators cs:Vědecká kalkulačka ms:Mesin kira saintifik no:Vitenskapelig kalkulator ja:関数電卓 sv:Funktionsräknare