[ Delaware River and Bay Authority Delaware River Basin Commission Delaware River Joint Toll Bridge Commission ] [ Delaware River Port Authority of Pennsylvania and New Jersey Drpalogo.gif 150px DRPA July 17, 1951 Bi-state Authority; Congressionally approved Interstate compact entity Delaware River Port Authority One Port Center 2 Riverside Drive PO Box 1949 Camden, NJ 08101 Pennsylvania and New Jersey; Philadelphia, Camden, and region Chief Executive Officer John J. Matheussen http://www.drpa.org ] The Delaware River Port Authority (DRPA) is a bi-state instrumentality created by a Congressionally approved interstate compact between the governments of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the State of New Jersey. The Authority principally is charged to maintain and develop the Philadelphia-Camden port district, which links the two states with four bridges, a ferry, and a mass transit rail line across the Delaware River. [ History ] In 1919, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and The State of New Jersey legislatures approved the creation of the Delaware River Bridge Joint Commission. The first meeting was held on December 12, 1919, with commissioners from both Pennsylvania and New Jersey. On July 1, 1926, the first bridge opened before a crowd of over 25,000 people. It was named the &quot; Delaware River Bridge, &quot; and following the ceremony, over 100,000 people participated in the inaugural walk. United States President Calvin Coolidge came the next day to dedicate the bridge. However, there was thought that there should be a regional governing body for a port authority, and also the construction of another bridge and a high speed rail line. And so, on July 17, 1951 United States President Harry S. Truman signed a bill, which created the Delaware River Port Authority. In 1955, plans were made for a new bridge to connect South Philadelphia and Gloucester City. Additionally, the Delaware River Bridge officially had its name changed to the Benjamin Franklin Bridge. On May 15, 1955, the Walt Whitman Bridge opened, helping to gain papularity of Veterans Stadium, The Spectrum, and other South Philadelphia attractions. By 1966, two more bridges were approved; the Commodore Barry Bridge (opened February 1, 1974) and the Betsy Ross Bridge (opened April 30, 1976). In 1974 and 1990, the Ben Franklin Bridge and the Walt Whitman Bridge carried their one-billionth vehicle, respectively. { DRPA History } [ Board of Commissioners ] The Delaware River Port Authority is governed by 16 commissioners; eight commissioners each represent New Jersey and Pennsylvania. All eight New Jersey commissioners are appointed by the Governor of New Jersey, and six Pennsylvania commissioners are appointed by the Governor of Pennsylvania. The Pennsylvania Treasurer and the Pennsylvania Auditor General serve as ex officio commissioners. These two officers are elected officials. The 16 commissioners also serve as the board of directors for the Port Authority Transit Corporation or PATCO, a DRPA subsidiary. [ Facilities ] [ Bridges ] [ right vertical top/bottom top/bottom 250 Commodore Barry Bridge From Ferry Rd.jpg Commodore Barry Bridge 250 BetsyRossBridge.jpg Betsy Ross Bridge 250 Walt Whitman Bridge from the air.jpg Walt Whitman Bridge 250 Ben Franklin Bridge.JPG Benjamin Franklin Bridge ] Commodore Barry Bridge Completed in 1974, it connects Chester, Pennsylvania with Bridgeport, New Jersey. It carries US Route 322 and New Jersey County Route 536. It is the last crossing of the Delaware River between New Jersey and Pennsylvania, the next crossing is the Delaware Memorial Bridge. Walt Whitman Bridge The most heavily-traveled of the four bridges, the Walt Whitman Bridge connects South Philadelphia to Gloucester City, New Jersey. It carries Interstate 76, also known as the Schuylkill Expressway. For passengers going Pennsylvania from New Jersey, it sees its heaviest volume traffic during sports contests, as the South Philadelphia Sports Complex is at the foot of the bridge. For passengers going into New Jersey from Pennsylvania, it sees its heaviest volume traffic from Memorial Day Weekend through Labor Day, as the Walt Whitman provides direct access to the Atlantic City Expressway, and thus to shore points in South Jersey, where many Philadelphia-area residents have shore houses, or go for a day trip. Benjamin Franklin Bridge The first completed bridge out of the four (opened in 1926), carries US Route 30 and Interstate 676, as well as the PATCO Speedline. The bridge connects Camden, New Jersey with Center City Philadelphia. It held the position of the World&apos;s longest suspension bridge from 1926 to 1929, until being surpassed by the Ambassador Bridge. Betsy Ross Bridge The youngest of the four bridges (opened 1976), it connects the Bridesburg section of Philadelphia to Pennsauken, New Jersey. It carries New Jersey Route 90. Upon arriving in Pennsylvania, it has a direct intersection with I-95. [ Ferry ] RiverLink Ferry [ Commuter railroad ] Port Authority Transit Corporation (PATCO) High Speedline [ Cruise ship terminal ] Pier One at the Philadelphia Naval Shipyard [ DRPA to upgrade Pier 1 cruise terminal Philadelphia Business Journal 2003-01-15 http://www.bizjournals.com/philadelphia/stories/2003/01/13/daily25.html 2008-10-11 ] [ Aerial tram ] [ Associated Press Philadelphia, N.J. tram still a dream USA Today 2004-07-21 http://www.usatoday.com/travel/news/2004-07-21-tram-trouble_x.htm 2008-10-11 ] Skylink (Partially built and then abandoned) [ Rail Yard ] AmeriPort Intermodal (Closed) [ Headquarters ] One Port Center: Camden, New Jersey office highrise designed by architect Michael Graves [ See also ] Delaware River Port Authority Police Department Interstate compact List of crossings of the Delaware River Port Authority of New York and New Jersey Delaware River and Bay Authority (a bi-state agency of New Jersey and Delaware ) Delaware River Joint Toll Bridge Commission [ References ] [ External links ] Delaware River Port Authority Official Website PATCO Official Website Speedliner Newspaper Website Category:Delaware River Category:United States interstate agencies Category:New Jersey law Category:Pennsylvania law Category:Port authorities in the United States Category:Ports and harbors of New Jersey Category:River ports of the United States Category:United States interstate compacts Category:1951 establishments in the United States Category:Government agencies established in 1951 Category:Camden, New Jersey de:Delaware River Port Authority fr:Delaware River Port Authority