{ English } { Mason Daring } Where the Heart Is is a 2000 drama / romance film directed by Matt Williams and produced by Susan Cartsonis, David McFadzean, Patricia Whitcher, and Matt Williams. Filmed in Austin, Texas, { The Late Show with David Letterman, April 28, 2000 } and Waco, Texas at Baylor University. [ http://www.baylor.edu/lariat/news.php?action%3Dstory%26amp%3Bstory%3D13631 Hollywoodcomes toBU ] The movie stars Natalie Portman and Ashley Judd. The screenplay, written by Lowell Ganz, is based on the best-selling novel by Billie Letts. The film follows Novalee Nation, a pregnant 17-year-old girl from Tennessee, who sets out for California with her boyfriend. When they stop in Oklahoma at the local Wal-Mart, her boyfriend abandons her. Since Novalee has only a few dollars, she secretly moves into the Wal-Mart store. She gives birth to her baby, attracting media attention, and she sets up a new life with the help of new friends. The film was released in the US by 20th Century Fox on April 28, 2000. [ Plot ] Seventeen and pregnant, Novalee Nation ( Natalie Portman ) sets off on a road trip from Tennessee to California with her ignorant ne&apos;er-do-well boyfriend, Willy Jack Pickens ( Dylan Bruno ). In Sequoyah, Oklahoma, Novalee asks her boyfriend to stop at Wal-Mart so that she can go to the bathroom and replace her shoes. When Novalee reaches out for her change at the register, the amount of $5.55 sends her into a panic and she runs outside to find that her boyfriend has left (Novalee believes that the number 5 is a sign of trouble or an event of significance is to come because when she was 5, her mother left her for a baseball player). For the rest of the afternoon, Novalee browses Wal-Mart. She meets Sister Husband ( Stockard Channing ), who mistakenly believes Novalee to be her long-lost relative Ruth Ann and gives her a buckeye tree. Novalee also meets a photographer named Moses Whitecotton ( Keith David ). Later that evening, Novalee feels sick and runs into the bathroom to vomit, and when she comes out again she discovers that the store is closed, locked, and dark. She soon figures out how to live undetected in the Wal-Mart. Novalee visits the library and meets Forney Hull ( James Frain ), who works at the library while caring for his sister (the librarian), whose health has been ruined by alcoholism. Over time, Forney reveals that he dropped out of Bowdoin College in Maine and tells Novalee that he had wanted to be a history teacher before he had to leave school. Novalee goes to Sister Husband&apos;s house and explains that she is not Ruth Ann. However, Sister Husband invites her in to stay for some cornbread and buttermilk, and Novalee plants the buckeye tree in Sister&apos;s yard. That night in the Wal-Mart, Novalee wakes up during a thunderstorm when she starts feeling pain in her stomach. Her water breaks and while attempting to clean it up, she goes into labor. When she falls because of the pain she notices that she was on the row 5 of the store so she makes a big effort to move to the next row, just in this moment, Forney (who watched her go into the store at closing time) jumps through a plate-glass window and helps deliver her baby. The next morning, Novalee wakes up in the hospital and became an instant celebrity after giving birth in a Wal-Mart. All day she is stalked by several newscasters. After being asked by her nurse Lexie Coop ( Ashley Judd ) what she will name her baby girl, Novalee decides to name her baby Americus (because Moses suggested Novalee to give her baby a strong name). Novalee gets to know Lexie, who reveals that she has had four children by three different men (And that Lexie named her children after snack names, like Twinkie, for example). While in the hospital, Novalee gets a visit from her mother ( Sally Field ), whom she has not seen since she was a child. Her mother asks if she has a place to live. Novalee says no, and her mother says that the two women can get an apartment together. Novalee shows her the $500 that she was given by the President of the Wal-Mart chain to her mother. Novalee agrees that her mother can come pick her and Americus up at 9:00 a.m. the next day. The next morning, it is 12:15 in the lobby, but her mother never shows up, and Novalee&apos;s hospital bill was $500. That afternoon, Sister Husband offers to let Novalee and the baby live at her house (as well as because Sister Husband doesn&apos;t know how to take care of the buckeye tree Novalee planted). Her boyfriend Willy Jack Pickens is shown trying to make it as a country singer, after being arrested for dating a young teenager (Who robbed a 7-11 ), and is hired by agent Ruth Meyers ( Joan Cusack ). Later, Novalee is shown to have a good time at Sister Husband&apos;s house. An extremely religious couple from Midnight, Mississipi come to show the &quot; Wal-Mart Baby &quot; the word of god, but Sister Husband slams the door on them. Later, Novalee and Forney are getting Christmas trees, when Forney remembers Americus is 5 months old. This shocks Novalee about her unlucky number and races home to find out that Americus was kidnapped. Sister Husband talks to a police officer about the church folks that came to her house, and that they were from Midnight, Mississipi. Novalee remembers that, in the hospital, she was reading cards that people sent to her and that one card said her baby was an abomination under God. Novalee asks Forney why bad things happened to her. Then, they follow the police cars to the outside of a church, where they find Americus, in Baby Jesus &apos;s bed. Five years pass, and Novalee begins a career as a photographer with the help of Moses Whitecotton (whom she befriended in the Wal-mart). One day, when a tornado blows through the town, Novalee and Americus hide in an underground shelter, but Sister is out running an errand and does not make it back in time. Sister Husband is killed and their home is destroyed. After the funeral, one of Sister Husband&apos;s friends from AA informs Novalee that she is the beneficiary of Sister&apos;s estate, worth around $41,000. Novalee proceeds to build a new home for herself and Americus on Sister&apos;s land. One day, Novalee receives a call from Brownie, Lexie&apos;s oldest child. Novalee cannot hear what he is saying, and eventually perceives that something bad has happened so she drives to Lexie&apos;s house. She finds Lexie in the bedroom with Brownie and Praline, covered in blood and bruised. Novalee permits Lexie and her now five children to live with her and Americus in their new house. Lexie tells Novalee that her new boyfriend had gone to her house and tried to molest her two oldest children, Brownie and Praline, before Praline had thrown up on him and Lexie returned home from work early and caught him before he got to Brownie. She attacked him, hitting him twice before he knocked her out. Lexie is at first devastated, but as time passes she and her children begin to heal, and she eventually marries the ordinary but reliable &quot; Ernie the Exterminator &quot; and has another child. When Forney’s sister passes away due to alcoholism and he does not appear to be at the funeral, Novalee finds him in a hotel and comforts him. Novalee and Forney end up sleeping together, after which he tells her that he loves her and she doesn&apos;t reply. Forney returns to Maine to bury his sister, and the town&apos;s people make comments about how he can finally leave town and have a real life. When Forney comes back, he talks about visiting Bowdoin and Novalee realizes that he could now finish his education. Forney says he loves her and wants to get a factory job and stay with her, but Novalee lies, saying she does not love him, and he leaves. On Americus&apos;s 5th birthday, Novalee is paranoid about her party because of the unlucky 5 (When Americus was 5 days old, she had a sickness. 5 weeks old, she had an ear infection. 5 months old, she was kidnapped). Later, Novalee picks up a newspaper and reads a story about a double amputee being robbed of his wheelchair. The man proves to be Willy Jack, her ex-boyfriend and father of her daughter. Willy lost his legs when he was drunk because he was sued of copyright infrigment for his hit song. While he was drunk, he kept hearing Novalee&apos;s voice talking about Americus, then he tripped on train tracks and an oncoming train. During his singing career, he failed to see Novalee because he entered an elevator with his agent (prior to their break-up) just moments after Novalee left the other elevator, in order to receive an award for a prized photograph. She visits Willy in the hospital and tells him about what happened to her. He admits that he lied to her when he told her that he didn&apos;t feel the baby&apos;s heart beat the day he left her behind. Willy says he wishes he could go back and undo the lie, because of how one lie can change your whole life. Willy explains people lie because they&apos;re &quot; scared, crazy, or just mean &quot;. Novalee realizes that she made a similar mistake lying to Forney. She drives Willy Jack home to Tennessee and then continues to Maine to find Forney at college. Novalee admits to him that she lied and that she really loves him and they return to Oklahoma to get married in a Wal-Mart. [ Differences between novel and film ] In the novel: Novalee finds the number 5 very unlucky. Sister Husband has blue hair. Lexie marries Leon Yoder (Ernie the Exterminator was not in the novel). Novalee hears from Willy Jack when Americus is five years old. Forney does not return to college; instead he travels around the nation. He eventually settles in Chicago and begins working in a bookstore. Forney and Novalee did not get married. Lexie is obese. She is constantly trying new fad diets and weight loss schemes. Benny Goodluck is left out of the film version. [ Cast ] Actor Role Natalie Portman Novalee Nation Ashley Judd Lexie Coop Stockard Channing Thelma &apos;Sister&apos; Husband Joan Cusack Ruth Meyers James Frain Forney Hull Dylan Bruno Willy Jack Pickens Keith David Moses Whitecotton Sally Field Mama Lill Margaret Hoard Mary Elizabeth Hull Mackenzie Fitzgerald Americus Nation Ray Prewitt Tim Cody Linley Brownie Coop [ Music ] Original music for the film was produced by Mason Daring. A soundtrack was released by RCA Records. &quot; That&apos;s the Beat of a Heart &quot; was performed by The Warren Brothers and featured Sara Evans, the videoclip for the song featured a number of scenes from the film. &quot; Flies on the Butter &quot; is played during the end credits and was written by Austin Cunningham. [ Reception ] Natalie Portman was given credit for her portrayal of Novalee Nation, put simply by Roger Ebert, that &quot; Portman is quite an actress &quot;. [ rogerebert.com Where the Heart Is http://rogerebert.suntimes.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID%3D%2F20000428%2FREVIEWS%2F4280306%2F1023 15 April 2006 ] The film opened in theatres in the United States on April 8, 2000. Where the Heart Is accumulated ( USD )$8,292,939 in its opening weekend, opening at number 4. The film went on to make $33,772,838 [ boxofficemojo.com Where the Heart Is http://boxofficemojo.com/movies/?id%3Dwheretheheartis.htm 15 April 2006 ] at the United States box office, just over twice its budget. It made $7,090,880 in international box office, for a worldwide total of $40,863,718. [ References ] [ External links ] [ 0198021 Where the Heart Is ] &apos;&apos;Where the Heart Is&apos;&apos; at Boxofficemojo.com category:2000s drama films category:2000 films category:20th Century Fox films category:American comedy-drama films category:American teen drama films category:Country music films category:Directorial debut films category:Films based on novels category:Films set in Oklahoma category:Pregnancy films category:Teen pregnancy in film and television de:Wo dein Herz schlägt es:Where the Heart Is fr:Où le cœur nous mène it:Qui, dove batte il cuore ka:იქ, სადაც გულია (ფილმი) nl:Where the Heart Is (2000) ja:あなたのために pl:Gdzie serce twoje pt:Where the Heart Is ru:Там, где сердце (фильм) sv:Där mitt hjärta finns vi:Where the Heart Is (phim 2000)