[ January 2012 ] [ January 2012 ] [ 51 53 22 N 08 18 40 W type:landmark_scale:2500 ] [ 75 acre m2 on ] { 80 } { http://www.fotawildlife.ie } Fota Wildlife Park is a wildlife park located on Fota Island, near Carrigtwohill, County Cork, Ireland. The park is set on [ 75 acre m2 ], and is home to nearly 30 mammal and 50 bird species. Some of the animals roam freely with the visitors, such as the ring-tailed lemurs and squirrel monkeys, while larger animals, including the giraffe and bison, live in paddocks with unobtrusive barriers. The purpose of this is to allow visitors view the animals in a more natural environment. [ Mission statement ] Fota Wildlife Park aims to be a leading contributor to the conservation of wildlife through conservation education, the breeding of endangered species and the promotion of conservation worldwide. [ January 2012 ] [ History ] Fota Island was the former home of the Smith-Barry family, descendants of Normans who came to Ireland in 1185. { Fota House } In those days the family’s lands were very extensive but they dwindled over the years until they were restricted to Fota Island. The estate was sold to University College Cork in 1975. In the meantime, Dublin Zoo had reached maximum development with the space available. So in 1979, the Director of Dublin Zoo proposed to the Zoological Society of Ireland Council that a wildlife park should be established. It was thought that it should be quite different in concept from a conventional zoo or safari park. It was then that Fota Island was proposed. That same year it was formally agreed that the Society would establish a wildlife park on [ 70 acre m2 ] at Fota. University College Cork kindly offered the land free of charge under license agreement. Fota Wildlife Park became a joint project of the Zoological Society of Ireland and University College Cork. Fundraising committees were set up in both Dublin and Cork. All the funds for the development were raised from public subscriptions, apart from a grant from Bord Fáilte for the perimeter fence. The first animals started to arrive to Fota Wildlife Park in late 1982, and Fota Wildlife Park was opened in the summer of 1983 by the then President of Ireland, Dr. Patrick Hillery. [ List Of animals ] The animals and birds at Fota Wildlife Park originate from a variety of habitats, most of which are threatened with degradation through human activity. Below is the list of these habitats and their associated animals at Fota Wildlife Park: Zebra and foal at Fota Wildlife Park Hot Deserts - Scimitar-horned Oryx Temperate Grasslands and Deserts - Guanaco - Mara Tropical Savanna - Indian Peafowl - Emu - Ostrich - Helmeted Guineafowl - Rothschild Giraffe - Common Zebra - Cheetah Free Ranging Ring Tailed Lemur Tropical Forests - Macaws - Brazilian Tapir - Ring-tailed Lemur s - Black and White Ruffed Lemurs - Red Ruffed Lemurs - Colombian Black Spider Monkey - White Faced Saki - Squirrel Monkey - Lion-tailed Macaques - Black and White Colobus - Siamang Gibbon - White-handed Gibbon - Agile Gibbon Temperate Forests Female White Tailed Sea Eagle found at Fota Wildlife Park - Bennett’s Wallaby - Eastern Grey Kangaroo - European Bison - Red Panda Wetlands - Capybara - Chilean Flamingo - Lechwe - Great White Pelican - White-tailed Sea Eagle Oceans - Humboldt Penguin - Common Seal [ Cheetah Run ] Hungry Cheetah at Fota Wildlife Park In 2006 a &apos;Cheetah Run&apos; was installed. This device ensures the cheetahs work for their food by suspending it on a wire that travels [ 10 ft m ] off the ground, at approximately 65  km/h. Cheetahs, by their very nature, will not work for their food if they do not have to. So in an effort to exercise them, and as part of their behavioural enrichment programme, the device was installed. [ Education Centre ] Fota Wildlife Park is home to an award winning education centre. The education programme taught there aims to support nature conservation by providing information, courses and activities, especially to young people. Courses cover a broad range of topics including ecology and conservation and are aimed at students at both primary school and secondary school level. In addition to this, the education centre provides summer camps that run through the school holidays. Every year, almost 13,000 students pass through Fota’s education centre. [ References ] [ External links ] Official Website [ 51.889585 N 8.311276 W type:landmark_region:IE title ] Category:Visitor attractions in County Cork Category:Zoos in the Republic of Ireland