In grammar, a part of speech (also a word class, a lexical class, or a lexical category) is a linguistic category of words (or more precisely lexical items), which is generally defined by the syntactic or morphological behaviour of the lexical item in question. Common linguistic categories include noun and verb, among others. There are open word classes, which constantly acquire new members, and closed word classes, which acquire new members infrequently if at all. Almost all languages have the lexical categories noun and verb, but beyond these there are significant variations in different languages. [ Kroeger Paul Analyzing Grammar: An Introduction 2005 Cambridge University Press Cambridge 978-0-521-01653-7 35 ] For example, Japanese has as many as three classes of adjective s where English has one; Chinese, Korean and Japanese have nominal classifier s whereas European languages do not; many languages do not have a distinction between adjectives and adverbs, adjectives and verbs (see stative verbs ) or adjectives and nouns [ September 2007 ], etc. This variation in the number of categories and their identifying properties entails that analysis be done for each individual language. Nevertheless the labels for each category are assigned on the basis of universal criteria. [ Kroeger Paul Analyzing Grammar: An Introduction 2005 Cambridge University Press Cambridge 978-0-521-01653-7 35 ] [ History ] The classification of words into lexical categories is found from the earliest moments in the history of linguistics. { Robins, R. H. (1989). General Linguistics. 4th ed. London: Longman. } In the Nirukta, written in the 5th or 6th century BCE, the Sanskrit grammarian Yāska defined four main categories of words: [ Bimal Krishna Matilal The word and the world: India&apos;s contribution to the study of language Oxford. Yaska is dealt with in Chapter 3 1990 Bimal Krishna Matilal ] nāma – noun s or substantives ākhyāta – verb s upasarga – pre-verbs or prefix es nipāta – particle s, invariant words (perhaps preposition s ) These four were grouped into two large classes: inflected (nouns and verbs) and uninflected (pre-verbs and particles). The ancient work on the grammar of the Tamil language, Tolkappiyam, dated variously between 1st and 10th centuries CE, classifies words [ Dr. S. Ilakkuvanar Tholkappiyam in English with critical studies, 2nd Ed. Educational Publishers 1994 ] in Tamil as peyar (noun), vinai (verb), idai (part of speech which modifies the relationships between verbs and nouns) and uri (word that further qualifies a noun or verb) A century or two after the work of Nirukta, the Greek scholar Plato wrote in the &apos;&apos;Cratylus&apos;&apos; dialog that &quot;... sentences are, I conceive, a combination of verbs [rhēma] and nouns [ónoma] &quot;. { Cratylus 431b } Another class, &quot; conjunctions &quot; (covering conjunction s, pronoun s, and the article ), was later added by Aristotle. By the end of the 2nd century BCE, the classification scheme had been expanded into eight categories, seen in the Art of Grammar (Τέχνη Γραμματική) : Noun : a part of speech inflected for case, signifying a concrete or abstract entity Verb : a part of speech without case inflection, but inflected for tense, person and number, signifying an activity or process performed or undergone Participle : a part of speech sharing the features of the verb and the noun Interjection : a part of speech expressing emotion alone Pronoun : a part of speech substitutable for a noun and marked for person Preposition : a part of speech placed before other words in composition and in syntax Adverb : a part of speech without inflection, in modification of or in addition to a verb, adjective, or other adverb Conjunction : a part of speech binding together the discourse and filling gaps in its interpretation The Latin grammar ian Priscian ( fl. 500 CE ) modified the above eightfold system, substituting &quot; interjection &quot; for &quot; article &quot;. It was not until 1767 that the adjective was taken as a separate class. { Beauzée, Nicolas, Grammaire générale, ou exposition raisonnée des éléments nécessaires du langage. (Paris, 1767). } Traditional English grammar is patterned after the European tradition above, and is still taught in schools and used in dictionaries. It names eight parts of speech: noun, verb, adjective, adverb, pronoun, preposition, conjunction, and interjection (sometimes called an exclamation). [ Controversies ] Since the Greek grammarians of 2nd century BCE, parts of speech have been defined by morphological, syntactic and semantic criteria. However, there is currently no generally agreed-upon classification scheme that can apply to all languages, or even a set of criteria upon which such a scheme should be based. Linguists recognize that the above list of eight word classes is drastically simplified and artificial. [ Zwicky Arnold 30 March 2006 What part of speech is &quot; the &quot; Language Log http://itre.cis.upenn.edu/~myl/languagelog/archives/002974.html 26 December 2009...the school tradition about parts of speech is so desperately impoverished ] For example, &quot; adverb &quot; is to some extent a catch-all class that includes words with many different functions. Some have even argued that the most basic of category distinctions, that of nouns and verbs, is unfounded, { Hopper, P. and S. Thompson. 1985. &quot; The Iconicity of the Universal Categories &apos;Noun&apos; and &apos;Verbs&apos; &quot;. In Typological Studies in Language: Iconicity and Syntax. John Haiman (ed), vol. 6, pp. 151–183, Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company } or not applicable to certain languages. { Broschart, Jürgen 1997. &quot; Why Tongan does it differently: Categorial Distinctions in a Language without Nouns and Verbs. &quot; Linguistic Typology 1(2):123–165. } [ English ] A tree diagram of English categories in accordance with modern linguistic studies English words have been traditionally classified into eight lexical categories, or parts of speech (and are still done so in most dictionaries): Noun: any abstract or concrete entity; a person (police officer, Michael), place (coastline, London), thing (necktie, television), idea (happiness), or quality (bravery) Pronoun: any substitute for a noun or noun phrase Adjective: any qualifier of a noun Verb: any action (walk), occurrence (happen), or state of being (be) Adverb: any qualifier of an adjective, verb, or other adverb Preposition: any establisher of relation and syntactic context Conjunction: any syntactic connector Interjection: any emotional greeting (or &quot; exclamation &quot; ) Although these are the traditional eight English parts of speech, modern linguists have been able to classify English words into even more specific categories and sub-categories based on function. The four main parts of speech in English, namely nouns, verbs, adjectives and adverbs, are labelled form classes as well. This is because prototypical members of each class share the ability to change their form by accepting derivational or inflectional morphemes. The term form is used because it refers literally to the similarities in shape of the word in its pronunciation and spelling for each part of speech. { Klammer, Thomas, Muriel R. Schulz and Angela Della Volpe. (2009). Analyzing English Grammar. Longman (6th edition) } Neither written nor spoken English generally marks words as belonging to one part of speech or another, as they tend to be understood in the context of the sentence. Words like neigh, break, outlaw, laser, microwave and telephone might all be either verb forms or nouns. Although -ly is a frequent adverb marker, not all adverbs end in -ly (-wise is another common adverb marker) and not all words ending in -ly are adverbs. For instance, tomorrow, fast, very can all be adverbs, while early, friendly, ugly are all adjectives (though early can also function as an adverb). Verbs can also be used as adjectives (e.g. &quot; The astonished child watched the spectacle unfold &quot; instead of the verb usage &quot; The unfolding spectacle astonished the child &quot; ). In such cases, the verb is in its participle form. In certain circumstances, even words with primarily grammatical functions can be used as verbs or nouns, as in &quot; We must look to the hows and not just the whys &quot; or &quot; Miranda was to-ing and fro-ing and not paying attention &quot;. [ Functional classification ] The study of linguistics has expanded the understanding of lexical categories in various languages and allowed for better classifying words by function. Common lexical categories in English by function may include: adjective s adverb s noun s verb s (except auxiliary verb s ) interjection s auxiliary verb s clitic s coverb s conjunction s determiner s ( article s, quantifier s, demonstrative adjective s, and possessive adjective s ) particle s measure word s adposition s (prepositions, postpositions, and circumpositions) preverb s pronoun s contraction s cardinal numbers [ See also ] Grammatical category Part-of-speech tagging Quirky subject Sliding window based part-of-speech tagging Syntactic category [ References ] [ External links ] [ part of speech ] [ Category:Parts of speech ] The Eight Classes Grouping All Words In The English Language How To Classify Words Into Parts Of Speech The parts of speech Parts of Speech Activities at Quia Guide to Grammar and Writing Martin Haspelmath. 2001. &quot; Word Classes and Parts of Speech. &quot; In: Baltes, Paul B. &amp; Smelser, Neil J. (eds.) &apos;&apos;International Encyclopedia of the Social and Behavioral Sciences&apos;&apos;. Amsterdam: Pergamon, 16538-16545. (PDF) Category:Grammar af:Woordsoort ar:أقسام الكلام az:Nitq hissəsi ba:Һүҙ төркөмдәре be:Часціны мовы be-x-old:Часьціна мовы bg:Част на речта ca:Categoria gramatical cv:Пуплев пайĕсем cs:Slovní druh da:Ordklasse de:Wortart et:Sõnaliik el:Μέρη του λόγου es:Categoría gramatical eo:Parolparto fa:پاره‌های سخن fo:Orðaflokkur fr:Nature (grammaire) fy:Wurdsoarte gl:Categoría gramatical ko:품사 hy:Խոսքի մասեր id:Kelas kata is:Orðflokkur it:Parti del discorso he:חלקי הדיבר ka:მეტყველების ნაწილები kk:Сөз табы la:Partes orationis lv:Vārdšķira lt:Kalbos dalis hu:Szófaj mk:Зборовна група nl:Woordsoort ja:品詞 no:Ordklasse nn:Ordklasse km:ថ្នាក់ពាក្យ nds:Woortaart pl:Część mowy pt:Classe gramatical ro:Parte de vorbire rue:Части речі ru:Часть речи sah:Саҥа чааһа stq:Woudoard simple:Part of speech sk:Slovný druh sl:Besedna vrsta sr:Врсте речи fi:Sanaluokka sv:Ordklass tl:Kauriang leksikal ta:சொற்களின் வகை tt:Сүз төркемнәре te:భాషా భాగాలు tg:Ҳиссаҳои нутқ uk:Частини мови vi:Từ loại zh:詞性