[ Philippines ] { Region } { National Capital Region } { Districts } { 1st and } { 2nd Districts of Taguig City } { Barangays } { 28 } { Mayor–council government } { Mayor } { Maria Laarni Cayetano ( } { Nacionalista ) } { Vice Mayor } { George A. Elias ( } { Liberal / } { KDT ) } { Incorporated (town) } { April 25, 1587 } { Incorporated (city) } { December 8, 2004 } { 47.88 } { 2010 } { 644473 } { auto } { PST } { +8 } { 14 } { 33 } { N } { 121 } { 5 } { E } { 16.0 } { Zip code } { 1630 to 1638 } { 2 } The City of Taguig (formerly spelled as Tagig; Filipino : Lungsod ng Taguig) is a highly urbanized city located in south-eastern portion of Metro Manila in the Philippines. From a thriving fishing community along the shores of Laguna de Bay, it is now an important residential, commercial and industrial center. The recent construction of the C-5 highway and the acquisition of the Fort Bonifacio development area has paved the way for the cityhood of the municipality. It will also be accessed by the future C-6 Road. Taguig City lies on the western shore of Laguna de Bay and is bordered by Muntinlupa City to the south, Parañaque City to the southwest, Pasay City to the west, Cainta and Taytay on the northeast and Makati City, Pateros, and Pasig City to the north. Taguig River, a tributary of the Pasig River cuts through the northern half of the municipality and Napindan River, also a tributary of the Pasig forms the common border of Taguig with Pasig City. The city ranked first among Philippine cities in the Ease of Doing Business Index, conducted by the World Bank &apos;s International Finance Corporation. { World Bank Group - Subnational Doing Business } [ History ] [ section May 2012 ] { Before the } { Spaniards came, Taguig was a part of the } { Kingdom of Tondo ruled by } { Rajah Soliman. There were also accounts that } { Chinese settlements were once present in the area as revealed by the recent archeological diggings of various artifacts like cups, plates and other utensils, which bear Chinese characters. This was believed to have originated from China&apos;s } { Ming dynasty. } Taguig was one of the earliest known territories to have been Christianized when the Spaniards succeeded in subjugating mainland Luzon through the Legazpi expedition in 1571. Between the years 1582 and 1583, Taguig was of the encomienda of Tondo headed by an Alcalde Mayor, Captain Vergara. It was in 1587 when Taguig was established as a separate &quot; pueblo &quot; (town) of the then province of Manila. Captain Juan Basi was its Kapitan from 1587 to 1588. According to records, Taguig had nine (9) barrios then namely, Bagumbayan, Bambang, Hagonoy, Palingon, Sta. Ana, Tipas, Tuktukan, Ususan, and Wawa. Records show that Tipas had once petitioned to become an independent town but was denied by the Spanish government. During that time, Taguig was accessible via the Pasig River, which was connected to two large bodies of water, the Manila Bay and Laguna de Bay. The population then was estimated to be 800 tributes. The town produced more than enough rice for their consumption but had less sugar cane to mill. The men lived through fishing while women wove cotton cloth and &quot; sawali &quot; from bamboo strips. The people of Taguig were known to have resisted both Spanish and American colonial rule. During that early period of Spanish colonition. Don Juan Basi, &quot; Kapitan &quot; of Taguig from 1587 to 1588, attempted to overthrow the Spanish government but failed, being exiled for two years as punishment. When then Katipunan was on its early years, many from Taguig became followers and later joined the uprising. The people of Taguig also joined the revolutionary government of General Emilio Aguinaldo on August 6, 1898. During the American occupation, they struggled against the forces of General Wheaton under the command of General Pio del Pilar. It was recorded that on February 6, 1898, Filipino forces including Taguig &quot; revolutionarios &quot; dislodged an American position in the hills of Taguig, now a portion of Pateros and Fort Bonifacio. They were defeated eventually by the Americans with superiority in the armaments and training. Taguig finally fell to the contingent of the First Washington Volunteer Infantry led by Col. Wholly. The defeat of the Filipinos after two years of struggle against the American forces subsequently subjected the Philippines to another system of governance. On August 14, 1898, United States occupied the islands and established a military government with General Wesley Meritt as the First Military Governor. He exercised legislative powers until September 1, 1900. At the start of American regime, Taguig was proclaimed as an independent municipality with the promulgation of General Order No. 4 on March 29, 1900. The town was subsequently incorporated to the newly created province of Rizal when the Philippine Commission promulgated Act. No. 137 on June 11, 1901. On October 12, 1903, Taguig, Muntinlupa and Pateros were merged by the virtue of Act. No. 942 with Pateros hosting the seat of the municipal government. The merger did not last long as a month later Muntinlupa was segregated from it and made part of Biñan when Act. No. 1008 was enacted on November 25, 1903. However it was returned to Taguig on March 22, 1905 with the promulgation Act. No. 1308. On February 29, 1908, Taguig was again declared an independent municipality through Executive Order No. 20. Eventually, Pateros separated from Taguig and both became independent municipalities of Rizal province on January 1, 1918. It was also during the American Colonial Period that the US government acquired a 25.78  km² property of Taguig for military purposes. This large piece of land which had a TCT dated 1902, was turned into a camp and was then known as Fort McKinley (named after the 25th president of U.S. President William McKinley ). When the Japanese occupied the Philippines in 1942, Fort McKinley was taken over by the Japanese Imperial Army. They occupied the military camp until the end of the war in 1945. After the Philippines gained its political independence from the United States on July 4, 1946, the US surrendered the Republic of the Philippines all right of possession, jurisdiction, supervision and control over the Philippine territory except the use of the military bases. On May 14, 1949, Fort McKinley was turned over to the Philippine government by virtue of the US embassy Note No. 0570. Fort McKinley was made the permanent headquarters of the Philippine Army in 1957 and was subsequently renamed Fort Bonifacio after the Father of the Philippine Revolution against Spain, Andres Bonifacio. The town&apos;s political subdivision was changed to barangays following the nationwide implementation of the Integrated Reorganization Plan (IRP) in the 1970s when the country was under Martial Law. The IRP has increased its subdivisions into 18 barangays, namely, Bagong Tanyag, Bagumbayan, Bambang, Calzada, Hagonoy, Ibayo-Tipas, Ligid-Tipas, Lower Bicutan, Maharlika, Napindan, Palingon, Signal Village, Sta. Ana, Tuktukan, Upper Bicutan, Ususan, Wawa, and Western Bicutan. In the year 2009, Taguig re-organized and re-arranged there barangays making a total of 28, the 10 added being Central Bicutan, Fort Bonifacio, South Daanghari, North Daanghari, San Miguel, New Lower Bicutan, South Signal,Katuparan, North Signal, Pinagsama and Tanyag. On November 7, 1975, Taguig was carved out from the province of Rizal to form the National Capital Region through Presidential Decree No. 824. Today, Taguig is still one of the seventeen (17) cities and municipalities that make up Metro Manila. In 1998, a bill was passed in Congress pushing for the cityhood of Taguig. The resulting plebiscite in April showed that the citizens were against cityhood. A recent petition to the Supreme Court sought a recount of the plebiscite and the Supreme Court on February 19, 2004 ordered the Commission on Elections to conduct a recount. The recount showed that the residents did want the municipality of Taguig to become a city (21,105 &apos;yes&apos; and 19,460 &apos;no&apos;). Subsequently, Taguig became a city on December 8, 2004. In 2008, the Taguig City council enacted City Ordinances Nos. 24-27, 57-61, 67-69, and 78, Series of 2008 which created ten (10) new barangays, carving them out from the initial 18 barangays. Hence, in December 2008, after a successful plebiscite, Taguig was politically subdivided into twenty eight (28) barangays. [ Origin of the Name ] The original 800 farmer-fishermen settlers of the area were good at threshing rice after harvest. Hence they were referred to as &quot; mga taga-giik, &quot; and their settlement as &quot; pook ng mga taga-giik. &quot; Spanish friar Fray Alonso de Alvarado, together with conquistador Rey Lopez de Villalobos who crossed Pasig River to reach Taguig in 1571 found &quot; taga-giik &quot; difficult to pronounce, and could only produce the word sounding like &quot; tagui-ig. &quot; So many mispronouncements later, &quot; tagui-ig &quot; was shortened to the present day &quot; Taguig. &quot; [ Landmarks ] East Superblock at the Bonifacio High Street. Fort Bonifacio - The National Headquarters of the Philippine Army and the Marine Bases of the Philippine Navy and Philippine Marine Corps. Bonifacio Global City - A marvel on its own, this 440 hectare Global City is based on a Master Plan that has been molded after the functionality of Seoul, the excellent systems of Singapore, the innovation of Vancouver and the Visionary outlook of Paris. It is both a quiet residential paradise with areas designed for international educational tourism and is also the heart of Asian Commerce. Food Terminal, Inc. (FTI) - the business center that boasts of over 300 medium scale companies in food manufacturing, electronics, garments and service industries. Camp Bagong Diwa - The camp is in Lower Bicutan, it is where NCRPO headquarters, prison complex and drug rehabilitation centers are located. Department of Science and Technology - A mini forest and eco-tourism park in Bicutan suitable for camping and bivouac activity. It is the national headquarters of the DOST. Veterans&apos; Museum - A museum where war stories in life-sized tableaus are retold using all forms of art fused with high-end technology. The Blue Mosque - A religious center and a socio-civic rendezvous for both Filipino and foreign Muslims in Maharlika Village. Bantayog ng Bayani - A fitting tribute to the heroes of Taguig during World War I at Fort Bonifacio. Shrine of St. Anne - Built in 1587 in Sta. Ana, one of the Philippines&apos; oldest churches. Dambanang Kawayan - A century old church in Tipas made of pure, native bamboo. It was inaugurated as a parish in 1969, comprising barangays Ligid-Tipas, Ibayo-Tipas, Calzada, and Palingon. Museo de Sta. Ana - A museum at the Shrine of St. Anne. The repository of artifacts detailing the rich religious culture and history of Taguig since 1857. Parola - Built in the 17th century, it stands guard at the mouth of Napindan Channel where the Pasig River crosses into the Laguna Lake. It became the secret rendezvous point of the Katipunan as it planned its moves to achieve Philippine&apos;s Independence. The Parola was chosen by KKK Supremo, Gat Andres Bonifacio, as a meeting place because of its strategic location being the most accessible channel from Tondo, Manila and from the Municipios along the Pasig River and the Province of Laguna. [ Education ] International School Manila Technological University of the Philippines Public - Primary Silangan Elementary School Taguig Elementary School Tipas Elementary School Kapt. Eddie T. Reyes Memorial Elementary School Ususan Elementary School Dr. A. Natividad Elementary School Napindan Elementary School E.C. Santos Elementary School R.P. Cruz Elementary School C.P. Tiñga Elementary School Sta. Teresa Elementary School Upper Bicutan Elementary School Bagong Tanyag Elementary School Daang Hari Elementary School EM&apos;s Signal Village Elementary School Tenement Elementary School Public - Secondary Taguig National High School Taguig Science High School Senator Rene Cayetano Science and Technology High School Western Bicutan National High School Signal Village National High School Gen. R. Papa Memorial High School Marichu R. Tiñga High School-TNHS Annex Upper Bicutan National High School Tipas National High School Bagumbayan National High School Public - Tertiary Philippine Public Safety College Polytechnic University of the Philippines, Taguig campus Technological University of the Philippines-Taguig Campus Taguig City University TESDA Private - Primary to Secondary Academia de San Bartolome de Taguig Academia De San Isidro Athens Academy Battlefield Baptist Academy Bicutan Parochial School Christian Harvest Academy Taguig Christian Light Academy Colegio De Sta. Ana (Sta. Ana Parochial School) DEJAN Integrated School E.P. Ville Integrated Academy Gracel Christian College Foundation Inc. Grants Apostolic Institute Hansarang Christian Academy Heritage Christian Academy of Bicutan HSL – BRAILLE Integrated School Integrated Montessori Center Leaders International Christian School Learn &amp; Explore Montessori School Mary Lourdes Academy Mt. Moriah Christian Academy Maharlika Bandara-Inged Integrated School Maharlika Village, Islamic Madrasa MCA Montessori School MGC-New Life Christian Academy Mere Academy Noah&apos;s Academy Icorporated Philippine Army Officer’s Ladies Found School Fredreach Preparatory School of Taguig Inc. Zinah Christian Academy Gabby Christian Academy St. Andre Academy of Taguig Eastern Achiever Academy of Taguig St. Patricia Foundation School Regis Grace Montessori Royal Era Academy SDLj Montessori School St. Ignatius of Loyola School St. Ives School St. John Kenneth Academy of Taguig St. Peter Parochial School St. Vincent Learning Center Sto. Niño Catholic School Sto. Niño of Lower Bicutan School Southville Woodland School (Rename) Summit School Total Concept Integrated School Victory Leadership Institute Go and shine Learning School Private - Primary to Tertiary The Fisher Valley College Saint Francis of Assisi College System Private - Tertiary Global City Innovative College STI College St. Chamuel Institute of Technology AMA Computer Learning Center Enderun Colleges Private - International Schools British School Manila International School Manila Leaders International Christian School Everest Academy Manila Chinese International School Manila Korean International School Philippines Manila Japanese School Educational Institutions Taguig City { Taguig city book } is home to several prestigious international schools such as the British School Manila, International School Manila, and Manila Japanese School, which are all located in the University Parkway of Bonifacio Global City. The Chinese International School Manila, Enderun Colleges, and Korean International School Philippines are in the nearby area of McKinley Hill. Other schools in Fort Bonifacio are the Global City Innovative College, Leaders International Christian School (Christian-based curriculum), Everest Academy Manila (a Catholic-run international school), Victory Leadership Institute, and MGC-New Life Christian Academy. Two of the top state universities are also in Taguig City—the Polytechnic University of the Philippines, and the Technological University of the Philippines. Both universities are located in Bicutan, Taguig City. The Technical Education and Skills Development Authority (TESDA) was established through the enactment of &quot; Technical Education and Skills Development Act of 1994 &quot;, which was signed into law by President Fidel V. Ramos. This Act aims to encourage the full participation of and mobilize the industry, labor, local government units, and technical-vocational institutions in the skills development of the country&apos;s human resource. The TESDA complex and facilities are located at the East Service Road of the South Luzon Expressway in Taguig City. The Philippine Public Safety College in Fort Bonifacio is an educational institution offering undergraduate and graduate programs for the training, human resource development, and continuing education of police, fire and jail personnel. Taguig City has two Islamic educational institutions located in Maharlika Village—the Maharlika Bandara-Inged Integrated School and the Maharlika Village Islamic Madrasah. Other notable schools in Taguig City are the city-run Taguig Science High School in Hagonoy, Taguig National High School, a state-owned secondary institution in New Lower Bicutan, the Catholic Church -owned Colegio de Sta. Ana (formerly Sta. Ana Parochial School), The Fisher Valley College, a Christian school in Hagonoy, and Saint Francis of Assisi College System, a Catholic school in Bagumbayan. The Taguig City University started their operations in November 2006 with night classes at two of the city&apos;s larger secondary schools. Construction of a school building will follow soon at a lot beside Taguig City Hall of Justice in Lower Bicutan. It is now the largest public college in the area. In the auditorium of TCU (Taguig City University) there is the city&apos;s musical Kilos Kabataan. { Taguig University will have own campus in 2009 } [ Conflict ] The district of Fort Bonifacio Makati City and Taguig have recently fought over the jurisdiction of Fort Bonifacio. This Philippine military base, most of which has been converted to a modern commercial and residential development area, lies in an ambiguous area. A portion of the base, including the Libingan ng mga Bayani (Heroes&apos; Cemetery) and the Manila American Cemetery and Memorial lies within Taguig, while the northern portion where the development center is now located used to be considered part of Makati. A 2003 ruling by a judge in the Pasig Regional Trial Court has upheld the jurisdiction of Taguig over the whole of Fort Bonifacio, including the Fort Bonifacio Global City. [ Ruling ] The Supreme Court on June 27, 2008 per Leonardo Quisumbing, dismissed the suit of the Makati City, seeking to nullify Special Patents 3595 and 3596 signed by Fidel Ramos conveying to the Bases Conversion and Development Authority public land in Fort Bonifacio, Taguig City. Because of a pending civil case filed by the Taguig City government asking the court to define its territorial boundaries, Makati therefore cannot stop Taguig from collecting taxes on land located in Fort Bonifacio. { manilastandardtoday.com, Court junks Makati’s suit to nullify Ramos patents } { supremecourt.gov.ph, Binay v Taguig, G.R. No. 163175, June 27, 2008 } { inquirer.net, Court rules against Makati in property dispute case } Taguig City is competing with Makati City where round-the-clock construction of office and residential towers, as well as hotels and retail and commercial areas, BPO and Call Centers are now transferring to Taguig City. [ City Government ] [ City council (2010-2013) ] Position Name Mayor Ma. Laarni L. Cayetano Vice Mayor George A. Elias 1st District Congressman Arnel M. Cerafica Councilors Gamaliel N. San Pedro Jaime R. Labampa Baby Gloria V. De Mesa Carlito M. Ogalinola Baltazar T. Mariatigue Rodel C. Marcelino Roderick Carlos B. Papa Ronnette O. Franco 2nd District Congressman Sigfrido R. Tiñga Councilors Aurelio Paulo R. Bartolome Ricardo J. Jordan Erwin G. Manalili Edwin T. Eron Estela A. Gasgonia Jeffrey B. Morales Michelle Anne B. Gonzales Milagros F. Valencia [ Barangays ] [ Population Census 73702 134137 266637 381350 467375 613343 644473 ] Taguig City is politically subdivided into 28 barangays. In December 2008, ten new barangays were created in the city after a successful plebiscite by virtue of City Ordinance Nos. 24-27, 57-61, 67-69, and 78, Series of 2008. { Taguig City has added 10 new barangays (Positive News Media) } First District Barangay Brgy. Chairman Population (2010) [http://www.census.gov.ph/data/sectordata/2010/2010CPH_ncr.pdf Total Population by Province, City, Municipality and Barangay:as of May 1, 2010 - National Statistics Office] Bagumbayan Delio J. Santos 33,334 Bambang Danilo P. Manaloto 7,168 Calzada Rommel B. Tanyag 17,051 Hagonoy Tomas R. Cuevas 17,975 Ibayo-Tipas Reynaldo D.G. Flores 18,744 Ligid-Tipas Lamberto M. Mañosca 7,868 Lower Bicutan Ricardo S. Cruz Jr. 45,641 New Lower Bicutan Aurelio S. Padilla 34,897 Napindan Mario M. Esguerra 13,354 Palingon Jerome M. Mendiola 11,863 San Miguel Vicente G. Espital 6,731 Santa Ana Roberto M. Flogen 14,879 Tuktukan Eduardo T. Cruz 8,113 Ususan Sonny C. Marcelino 32,223 Wawa Phillip E. Buenaflor 8,420 Parts of Hagonoy became under the jurisdiction of a new barangay San Miguel Lower Bicutan was divided into two, the other one to be known as Barangay New Lower Bicutan Second District Barangay Brgy. Chairman Population (2010) Central Bicutan Jennifer F. Alit 25,514 Central Signal Village Pat Henry A. Duenas 35,752 Fort Bonifacio Lino Edgardo S. Cayetano 23,144 Katuparan Olympia Q. de la Cruz 19,376 Maharlika Village Yasser G. Pangandaman 17,781 North Daang Hari Lorenzo O. Fortuno 10,682 North Signal Village Richard Paul T. Jordan 25,921 Pinagsama Ma Victoria Mortel Balidoy 23,612 South Daang Hari Willie D. Hernandez 17,220 South Signal Village Henry I. Duenas Sr. 34,118 Tanyag Joseph S. Sucaldito 21,161 Upper Bicutan Myrna M. Dela Peña 39,005 Western Bicutan Nicky C. Supan 72,926 Signal Village was divided into four barangays, Central Signal Village (originating barangay), Katuparan, North Signal Village, and South Signal Village. Bagong Tanyag was divided into three barangays, North Daang Hari, South Daang Hari, and Tanyag proper (originating barangay) Parts of Upper Bicutan became under the jurisdiction of a new barangay Central Bicutan Western Bicutan was divided into three barangays, Fort Bonifacio, Pinagsama and Western Bicutan (originating barangay) [ References ] [ External links ] Official Website of Taguig City Taguig Cityhood Gets Comelec Approval The Manila Times “Executive Order No. 256: Declaration on the Effect of Special Patent No. 3596 and Establishing a Makati-Taguig Boundary Committee.” Office of the President, Republic of the Philippines. [ Pateros, Pasig Pasay Parañaque Taguig Laguna de Bay Muntinlupa Makati Cainta, Rizal Taytay, Rizal ] [ 14 33 N 121 5 E source:eswiki_region:PH_type:city title ] Category:Cities and municipalities on the shores of Laguna de Bay Category:Cities in the Philippines ceb:Dakbayan sa Taguig cbk-zam:Ciudad de Taguig es:Taguig eo:Taguig ko:타기그 ilo:Ciudad ti Taguig id:Taguig City it:Taguig pam:Taguig Lakanbalen nl:Taguig ja:タギッグ pt:Taguig ru:Тагиг fi:Taguig sv:Taguig City tl:Lungsod ng Taguig vi:Taguig war:Taguig diq:Taguig zh:達義市