[ September 2009 ] [ Ender&apos;s Game Andrew Wiggin &quot; Ender&apos;s Game &quot; Ender in Exile Orson Scott Card Asa Butterfield Speaker for the Dead Soldier John Paul Wiggin (father) Theresa Wiggin (mother) Peter Wiggin (brother) Valentine Wiggin (sister) Novinha Ribeira Miro Ribeira (step-son) Ela Ribeira (step-daughter) Quim Ribeira (step-son) Olhado Ribeira (step-son) Quara Ribeira (step-daughter) Grego Ribeira (step-son) ] Andrew &quot; Ender &quot; Wiggin is a fictional character from Orson Scott Card &apos;s science fiction story Ender&apos;s Game and its sequels ( Speaker for the Dead, Xenocide, Children of the Mind, Ender in Exile ), as well as in the first part of the spin-off series, Ender&apos;s Shadow. The book series itself is an expansion of Card&apos;s earlier short story &quot; Ender&apos;s Game. &quot; In the upcoming film adaptation of &apos;&apos;Ender&apos;s Game&apos;&apos;, Ender will be portrayed by Asa Butterfield. [ Ender&apos;s Game ] Ender&apos;s Game is the first book in the series. Andrew &quot; Ender &quot; Wiggin was the youngest of three children, contrary to a strict two-child policy. His existence was called for by a program aiming at producing commanders for humanity&apos;s war against the Formics, or &quot; Buggers &quot;. He learned how to do so at Battle School, an Earth -orbiting space station that trained similar prodigies. He received the same education as other children, but the military had recognized him as their best bet to be supreme commander and often manipulated its own rules to make sure Ender had not only the necessary technical skills, but also the right character for their ends. Specifically, Ender was conditioned to be entirely self-sufficient from a very young age. As a child, Ender is bullied at school for being a &quot; Third &quot; (the third child in a society where excessive breeding is frowned upon), and tormented at home by his brother Peter, a sadistic bully who resents the attention Ender gets from the military. His only refuge is with his beloved sister Valentine, who acts as his protector and only friend. When he is accepted into Battle School, he is broken-hearted at the thought of leaving her, but she assures him that they will always have a bond. At Battle School, Ender is exposed to great emotional and mental anguish and even physical danger. The administration is forbidden from protecting him in order to guarantee that he would never look to anybody else for help. Ender breezes through academics, his main interest being the centerpiece of the school: a team-based three-dimensional laser tag competition in the zero-g Battle Room. He becomes first a masterful player, then a masterful strategist, and is eventually assigned command of Dragon Army. He molds the group of untested and unwanted students into the most successful army in the history of the school (it is revealed in Ender&apos;s Shadow that Julian &quot; Bean &quot; Delphiki actually chose them). After graduating several years ahead of time, he is transferred to Command School on Eros. There he trains in interstellar fleet combat with holographic simulators. After Ender masters the game under ordinary conditions, the game changes from one with direct control of ships to one where he relays commands to others - his friends and associates from Battle School, namely, Julian &quot; Bean &quot; Delphiki, Alai, Shen, Petra Arkanian, Dink Meeker, Crazy Tom, Hot Soup, Fly Molo, Vlad, Dumper, and Carn Carby. Under the tuition of the legendary saviour of humanity from the previous war, Mazer Rackham, Ender and his trusted companions take on a grueling series of battles and emerge victorious each time, although the mounting pressure pushes Ender to the edge. The final battle takes place above a simulated planet, against an enemy with overwhelming numerical superiority. Ender perceives this as a grossly unfair test, and resolves to win by breaking the rules. This, he thinks, would convince his instructors that he is not the man to lead the Fleet into battle with the Formics. Instead of fighting the enemy ship-to-ship, Ender penetrates their defensive perimeter and destroys the planet itself. Not until after the pandemonium that followed is he told that it was not actually a simulation: Instead of taking on Rackham in what they had thought was a long series of simulations, he and his jeesh had been unknowingly issuing orders to real ships in real combat. The final battle in fact consisted of the destruction of the Bugger home world and the apparent eradication of the Bugger species, resulting in Ender&apos;s rise to world adulation. Ender, however, is stricken with guilt for having unknowingly committed xenocide, as well as with anger at himself for allowing the military to use him as a tool. In the wake of the war, Valentine informs him that he would never be allowed to return to Earth due to her own actions in an effort to protect him from Peter, who was becoming a major political force on Earth (In Shadow of the Hegemon, Peter contradicts this and states that it was himself that insisted Ender be exiled for his own protection, to keep his brother from being kidnapped and used as a tool during the revolt that follows). He instead journeys with her to one of the colonies being established on the now-abandoned Bugger worlds. Once there, he discovers a fertilized pupa of a Queen Bugger, hidden in a place that the Buggers designed for him to discover by modelling it to resemble part of an interactive computer game he played during his years in the Battle School. The buggers find out about it during his tormented dreams of them in Command School. The pupal Queen is capable of continuing the Bugger race. Through rudimentary telepathic communication with the Queen, he learns what he had begun to suspect before the war&apos;s end: The entire conflict had been a mistake, the result of the inability of two alien species to communicate. He further learns from the Queen that the Buggers had felt terrible regret for having mistakenly fought humans and that they had forgiven Ender for their own deaths even as he orchestrated their destruction. Empathizing with the Queen, Ender promises to find her a home to grow where the Buggers would not be annihilated by the humans. To foster this eventual rebirth, Ender writes a book called &quot; The Hive Queen &quot;, which tells the story of the war from the Formic perspective. Ender uses the pseudonym &quot; Speaker for the Dead &quot; to author it. When Peter, who had advanced to the position of Hegemon of Earth, contacts him, having realized Ender was the writer, the Speaker for the Dead writes a second novel, &quot; The Hegemon &quot;, a human parallel to the first book. The two are combined by popular culture, eventually becoming one of the founding texts of a quasi-religious practice on the colonies of Earth. After writing the book, Ender and Valentine depart in a ship in an attempt to find a planet that would allow the Queen to grow, and that they could call their new home. [ Speaker for the Dead ] When Ender shows up in Speaker for the Dead, some 3000 years after the events of Ender&apos;s Game, he is departing a planet where his sister Valentine has found a husband. He has also acquired an integrated computer which he usually uses to communicate to a powerful artificial intelligence known as Jane, whose existence is not made known to anyone. He is living as an anonymous Speaker for the Dead, keeping his identity as the &quot; Ender the Xenocide &quot; who orchestrated the victory over the Formics a secret; his book &quot; The Hive Queen and the Hegemon &quot; in which he &quot; spoke for the dead &quot; Formics worked well enough (worked as it was intend to do) such that most of humanity now considers Ender to have been a heartless monster who destroyed a race for no reason, and the name &quot; Ender &quot; is now considered vile, an insult. He departs for the planet Lusitania, where a request has been sent out for a speaker to speak on behalf of a researcher who died from contact with the planet&apos;s indigenous species. By the time he arrives at the planet 22 years later (relativity having aged him only slightly; less than two weeks) he finds that the original call has been rescinded. However two other calls have gone out for more recent deaths. Ender discovers that both calls originated from the same &apos;family&apos;; the first from Novinha &apos;s daughter Ela requesting someone speak for the death of Novinha&apos;s husband Marcos, and the second from her eldest son Miro, who has asked for a speaker for the researcher Libo, who died similarly to the older xenologer. Ender begins to investigate the Marcos figure first and so has frequent unwanted contact with Novinha&apos;s family. His honest and open approach endears him to the elder children as a father figure; it&apos;s discovered very easily that Marcos was very abusive to his wife and children. With the help of Jane and his connection with the children, he discovers multiple secrets that have been hidden away for years. However, in the process of speaking with the local religious group, the Children of the Mind monastic order on the planet, he tires of Jane&apos;s semi-sarcastic commentary and turns off his connection to her, something he has never done before. The result of this is the breaking of Jane&apos;s friendship with him, something he forever regrets. During this time, Jane, without consulting Ender, sends incriminating reports to the intersteller authorities who order the arrest of Miro and Ouanda, the researchers and lovers who have been investigating the piggies most recently, and cancel the colony&apos;s charter, something which forces the colonists to eventually rely on Ender for guidance. Ender meanwhile has been receiving pressure from the Queen&apos;s pupa to allow her to settle on this world because she has been in telepathic contact with another race. Ender assumes this race is the piggies, although the bipedal life forms that are the primary contacts of Miro and Ouanda seem very simple and not telepathic at all. After the sanctions are put in place, he gets Miro and Ouanda to allow him to visit the piggies, who have been asking to meet him, the &apos;original Speaker&apos; (a claim Miro and Ouanda have been dismissing as a misunderstanding). Ender destroys many of the assumptions of the researchers when he not only admits to being the original Speaker, but has the piggies demonstrate that the trees they grow from the corpses of those who have been ritually killed are in fact their third stage of life which allows them to reproduce. The ritual killings that were done of the two xenologers were misunderstandings by the piggies, who thought the humans reproduced in a similar fashion. After those revelations, he proceeds to do his Speaking for Marcos, where he reveals many secrets hitherto buried mostly by Novinha. Foremost among them is that Marcos was incapable of having children, and Novinha&apos;s children are all in fact the children of Libo. This is devastating news to Miro, because it means his girlfriend Ouanda is in fact his half-sister. It is around this time that the sanctions from the Intergalactic Congress are learned of. Ender recommends to the colony that they declare themselves in rebellion, and reestablishes contact with Jane who masks their ansible signal. By the end of the book, he has entered into the beginnings of a relationship with Novinha. His sister Valentine has agreed to come to the colony. He has also planted the Queen&apos;s pupa on a far side of the planet, where there would be the first Formics in 3000 years. [ Xenocide ] During Xenocide, Ender is looked to as an unofficial leader for the multiple efforts being undertaken in the rebel Colony of Lusitania. He is helping as much as he can with Novinha&apos;s work in protecting humans from the descolada virus. The Descolada is fatal to humans, but is essential for the piggies&apos; life and reproduction. The Formics have an immune system that is advanced enough to protect them, and the humans have been using anti-viral dietary supplements, but both defenses are starting to fade in effectiveness in the face of the virus&apos; rampant mutations. Ender is also attempting to keep the peace on planet among the three species where resentment is brewing. The humans are starting to resent the piggies for being the reason they can&apos;t just kill the descolada outright. The existence of the new Formic colony is not general knowledge, but Ender knows that their appearance and their non-human way of reasoning would cause friction with the humans. Particularly troublesome are Novinha&apos;s two youngest children; Grego, who is something of a rabble-rouser among the humans, and Quara, who sees the virus as sentient and is bringing up problematic objections to the research her mother and sister are doing. The piggies and the Formics are also worried about the approaching human fleet, which may destroy the planet if the threat of the descolada virus is unleashed on humanity. Eventually research ordered by the government on another planet, Path, leads a young genius girl, Han Qing-jao, to deduce the existence of Jane, who is inextricably tied to the ansible system. Jane reveals herself to Qing-jao in an effort to prevent her from informing the authorities by telling her that the OCD her people suffer from was governmentally ordered and orchestrated, a plea which the girl&apos;s father Han Fei-tzu and handmaiden Si Wang-mu agree with. However, the report to the authorities is dispatched regardless and the government enacts a plan to temporarily deactivate the ansible network to purge Jane from the system. The father agrees to help with the Descolada problem regardless of his daughter&apos;s actions, in exchange for a cure for the pervasive OCD that plagues them. The Lusitanian researchers agree, but though a cure for both is designed, it proves impossible to synthesize; they can&apos;t cure the OCD without removing the genius as well, and the counter for the descolada simply won&apos;t be created. Meanwhile, putting together facts about Jane&apos;s origins, the ansible, and philotes, the irreducible building blocks of all matter everywhere, they deduce that Jane has the power to take any object she knows about in great detail and pull it outside the known universe, an area where conscious thought has a lot more power than anything else. Ender goes on the first test flight because Jane&apos;s existence was a direct result of his time at the Battle School, where the buggers established a connection with him via a computer simulation game; therefore, Jane is most likely to be able to keep Ender&apos;s form in her mind. Since Ender has all but passed Jane off to Miro at this point, due to the previous misunderstanding in Speaker, he must go as well. Ela goes because she is the only one with enough knowledge to produce the needed viruses. The test flight occurs with unexpected side-effects. Ela produces the new viruses, but Miro also gives himself a new body, undamaged unlike his old one. Ender, however, inadvertently creates copies of his brother and sister from his memories. They are more based on those memories than reality; therefore, Valentine is very soft and loving, and Peter is almost pure evil and malice. Horrified at what he has created, Ender removes himself from further efforts, as they will all need to involve the instantaneous travel Jane can do by moving things outside and Ender will not risk creating more things like his pseudo-siblings. [ Ender in Exile ] A book that chronicles the &apos;lost years&apos; between Ender&apos;s Game and Speaker for the Dead, Ender in Exile tells of Ender&apos;s initial set-off from Eros, the long journey to the first colony, Shakespeare, as well as his trip to the Indian-dominant colony of Ganges, where Ender encounters a familiar, yet not-so-familiar face. The court martial of Hyrum Graff is expanded upon; some light is shed on Graff&apos;s life after he was made Minister of Colonization, as well as where Mazer Rackham went off to after the Formic War. Ender&apos;s journey starts out on Eros, after he defeated the Formics, and after Peter, under the alias of Locke, has quelled the warring nations into a temporary truce. Valentine wishes to no longer be a part of Peter and his idea to rule the world. She tries to persuade her parents to come along with her to the ship in which Ender and several others would be traveling to the colony Shakespeare with, but they decline. Valentine goes alone to keep watch over Ender and be there as a maternal figure. Meanwhile Alessandra and her mother, Dorabella, sign-up to go on to Shakespeare (a planet) in an attempt to get away from Dorabella&apos;s mother and money problems. They had planned to be put into stasis during the two year voyage, but several complications occurred and instead they remained awake, along with the crew, Ender, Valentine, Admiral Quincy Morgan (the captain), and some other colonists who opted against stasis. Ender has a battle of wills throughout the voyage with Admiral Morgan, who attempts to usurp Ender&apos;s lawful position as Governor of Shakespeare, believing Ender to be a foolish child no one would follow. During the voyage, Dorabella seduces Admiral Morgan and tries to use her daughter, Alessandra, to seduce Ender hoping that, through her own marriage to Morgan and Alessandras&apos; successful marrying of Ender, Morgan could rule Shakespeare using Ender as a puppet. Upon arrival at Shakespeare, Ender quickly and easily crushes Morgan&apos;s attempted bloodless coup, with a little help from Minister of Colonization Hyrum Graff back on earth. Ender then successfully liberates Alessandra from her dominating mother, allowing her to finally live her life for herself. After two years as Governor, and completing &apos;The Hive Queen and the Hegemon&apos;, Ender convinces Valentine it&apos;s time for them to move on. Ender&apos;s first stop, at the request of Hyrum Graff, is the Hindu colony of Ganges which is governed by Virlomi, a former battle school student who caused an uprising in India before she was subdued and exiled by Peter Wiggin&apos;s Hegemony. Once there, Ender agrees to help Virlomi quell an uprising by a group called &apos;The Natives of Ganges&apos;, which is led by an angry young man named Randall Firth under the delusion that he is the son of Achilles de Flandres. The so-called &apos;natives&apos; have adopted &apos;The Hive Queen&apos; as a rallying cry, and begun to turn the name of war hero Ender Wiggin into mud, coining the phrase &apos;Ender the Xenocide&apos;. Ender is able to peacefully neutralize Randall, nearly getting himself killed in the process. He reveals Randall&apos;s true parentage (two of Ender&apos;s old friends and squadron commanders, Julian &apos;Bean&apos; Delphiki and Petra Arkanian Delphiki Wiggin ), after which Randall renounces his secret name, Achilles, and renames himself Arkanian Delphiki. Shortly after, Ender reunites mother and son by ansible. [ External links ] Original &quot; Ender&apos;s Game &quot; short story &apos;&apos;Ender&apos;s Game&apos;&apos; page on Card&apos;s website with link to first chapter Ender Saga Category:Characters in American novels of the 20th century Category:Characters in American novels of the 21st century Category:Characters in short stories Category:Child characters in comics Category:Child characters in literature Category:Ender&apos;s Game series characters Category:Fictional American people of Polish descent Category:Fictional characters from North Carolina Ender Wiggin Category:Fictional mass murderers Category:Fictional priests and priestesses Category:Fictional soldiers Category:Marvel Comics characters es:Andrew &apos;Ender&apos; Wiggin fr:Andrew Wiggin pl:Ender Wiggin zh:安德·维京