[ Shirak (disambiguation) ] [ Shirak Շիրակ hy Province Shirak Province administration in Gyumri Shirak.svg Location of Shirak within Armenia 40 50 N 43 55 E region:AM_type:adm1st title Country Armenia Capital Gyumri Governor Ashot Giziryan Metric 2681 Negligible 6th 257242 2002 2nd auto UTC+04 UTC+05 Postal code 2601-3126 AM-SH FIPS 10-4 AM07 ] Shirak ( [ Շիրակ ] ) is a province ( marz ) of Armenia. It is in the north-west of the country, bordering Turkey in the west and Georgia in the north. Its capital is Gyumri. Shirak is known as the homeland of khash. It is as much semi-desert as it is mountain meadow or high alpine. In the south, the high steppes crash into mountain terrain, verdant green in the spring, hues of reddish brown in the summer. Shirak is served by Shirak International Airport near Gyumri. [ History ] The ancient history of Shirak is similar to its cousin the Ararat Valley, steeped in legend to some, but found by archaeologists to have been inhabited 250,000 years ago, with settlements popping up along the Akhurian Valley beginning around 9000 BC. Agriculturally based, the region has few of the metallurgical centers found South, but still had sophisticated settlements. { Shirak Marz: page 3 of 35 - TourArmenia } Shirak borders the following marzer: Lori - east Aragatsotn - south [ Communities ] The province of Shirak consists of the following 119 communities (hamaynkner), of which 3 (bold in the table) are considered urban and 116 are considered rural. [ RA Shirak Marz Marzes of the Republic of Armenia in Figures, 2002-2006 National Statistical Service of the Republic of Armenia http://www.armstat.am/file/article/marz_07_e_30.pdf 2007 ] The division below is by raion, the administrative subdivisions of Armenia before 1995. Akhurik Akhuryan Arapi Arevik Aygebats Azatan Basen Bayandur Beniamin Getk Gharibjanyan Gyumri Hatsik Haykavan Hovit Hovuni Jajur Jajur kayaranin kits Jrarat Kamo Kaps Karmrakar Karnut Keti Krashen Lernut Marmashen Mayisyan Mets Sariar Pokrashen Shirak Vahramaberd Voskehask Yerazgavors | Anushavan Arevshat Artik Geghanist Getap Harich Haykasar Hayrenyats Horom Hovtashen Lernakert Lusakert Meghrashen Mets Mantash Nahapetavan Nor Kyank Panik Pemzashen Pokr Mantash Saralanj Saratak Spandaryan Tufashen Vardakar | Aghin Ani kayarani Anipemza Bagravan Dzithankov Dzorakap Gusanagyugh Haykadzor Isahakyan Jrapi Karaberd Lanjik Lusaghbyur Maralik Sarakap Sarnaghbyur Shirakavan | Arpeni Ashotsk Bashgyugh Bavra Dzorashen Ghazanchi Goghovit Hartashen Kakavasar Karmravan Krasar Lernagyugh Mets Sepasar Musayelyan Pokr Sariar Pokr Sepasar Salut Saragyugh Sarapat Sizavet Tavshut Torosgyugh Tsoghamarg Vardaghbyur Zuygaghbyur | Aghvorik Alvar Amasia Ardenis Aregnadem Bandivan Berdashen Byurakn Garnarich Gtashen Hoghmik Hovtun Jradzor Meghrashat Shaghik Tsaghkut Voghji Zarishat Zorakert Gyumri Artik Maralik Ashotsk Amasia [ Gallery ] Lmbatavank near Artik, 7th c. Harichavank Monastery, 8th c. Akhurian River The village of Harich. [ External links ] Shirak guide with detailed descriptions, by Rick Ney Shirak Marz Tourist Guide Shirak Regional Museum [ References ] [ 194 ] Category:Provinces of Armenia az:Amasiya bg:Ширак ca:Xirak de:Schirak et:Širaki maakond es:Shirak eo:Ŝirako fa:استان شیراک fr:Shirak ko:시라크 주 hy:Շիրակի մարզ id:Shirak it:Provincia di Shirak ka:შირაკის პროვინცია mk:Ширак ms:Shirak nl:Sjirak ne:शिराक प्रान्त ja:シラク地方 pnb:صوبہ شراک pl:Prowincja Szirak pt:Shirak ru:Ширакская область sco:Shirak Province simple:Shirak Province sr:Ширак (марз) su:Propinsi Shirak fi:Širak sv:Sjirak tr:Şirak İdari Bölgesi uk:Ширак (марз) war:Shirak (lalawigan) zh:希拉克省