[ 33 53 59.87 N 35 28 56.22 E region:LB_type:edu title ] [ 61 acre m2 on ] {; and AREC (Agricultural Research and Education Center), a } [ 247 acre km2 on ] { research farm and educational facility in the Beqa&apos;a Valley } The American University of Beirut (AUB); [ الجامعة الأميركية في بيروت ] ) is a private, independent university in Beirut, Lebanon. Degrees awarded at the American University of Beirut (AUB) are officially registered with the Board of Education in the State of New York. The university is ranked as the number one university in Lebanon by UWR {. Retrieved on 2011-12-27. } {. Retrieved on 2011-12-29. } and among the top 300 universities in the world by the Times Higher Education - QS World University Rankings. {. Retrieved on 2011-09-21. } AUB is also ranked as the first American university located outside of the U.S.A. {. Retrieved on 2011-09-21. } The American University of Beirut is governed by a private, autonomous Board of Trustees and offers programs leading to Bachelor &apos;s, Master ’s, MD, and PhD degrees. It collaborates with many prestigious and internationally renowned universities around the world, notably with Columbia University, George Washington University Medical School in Washington, DC; Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, and the University of Paris. The current president is the American epigraphist, philologist, and cultural anthropologist, Peter Dorman. The American University of Beirut (AUB) boasts an operating budget of 213$ million with an endowment of approximately $400 million. The campus is composed of 64 buildings, including the American University of Beirut Medical Center ( AUBMC ) (420 beds), 5 Libraries, 3 Museums, and 7 Dormitories. Almost one-fifth of AUB&apos;s students attended secondary school or university outside of Lebanon before coming to AUB. AUB Graduates reside in approximately 100 countries worldwide. The language of instruction is English. [ History ] Aerial view of AUB Campus In 1862 American missionaries in Lebanon and Syria, under the American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions, asked Daniel Bliss to establish a college of higher learning that would include medical training. On April 24, 1863, while Dr. Daniel Bliss was raising money for the new college in the United States and England, the State of New York granted a charter for the Syrian Protestant College. The college, which was renamed the American University of Beirut in 1920, opened with a class of 16 students on December 3, 1866. Dr. Bliss served as its first president, from 1866 until 1902. [ New York Times Rev. H.H. Jessup Dead, 1910-04-29 http://query.nytimes.com/mem/archive-free/pdf?res%3DF00D10FF3E5417738DDDA00A94DC405B808DF1D3 ] AUB alumni have had a broad and significant impact on the region and the world for many years. For example, 19 AUB alumni were delegates to the signing of the United Nations Charter in 1945 — more than any other university in the world. AUB graduates continue to serve in leadership positions as presidents of their countries, prime ministers, members of parliament, ambassadors, governors of central banks, presidents and deans of colleges and universities, businesspeople, engineers, doctors, teachers, and nurses. They work in governments, the private sector, and in nongovernmental organizations. On March 21, 2008, the Board of Trustees selected Peter Dorman to be AUB&apos;s 15th president. He succeeded John Waterbury who was president of AUB from 1998 to 2008. Dorman is an international scholar in the field of Egyptology and formerly chaired the University of Chicago &apos;s Department of Near Eastern Languages and Civilizations. [ 2011 June ], the total number of degrees and diplomas awarded totaled 82,032. [ Campus ] Part of the upper campus as seen from Penrose dormitory The [ 61 acre m2 on ] American University of Beirut campus is on a hill overlooking the Mediterranean Sea on one side and bordering Bliss Street on the other. [ Faculties and schools ] Faculty of Agricultural &amp; Food Sciences (FAFS) Faculty of Arts &amp; Sciences (FAS) Faculty of Engineering &amp; Architecture (FEA): Architecture, Computer &amp; Communications Engineering, Electical &amp; Computer Engineering, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering and Graphic Design Faculty of Health Sciences ] (FHS) Faculty of Medicine (FM), including the Rafic Hariri School of Nursing (HSON) Suliman S. Olayan School of Business (OSB) [ Research ] In 2007, the American University of Beirut reintroduced PhD programs and now offers six doctoral programs: Arab and Middle Eastern History, Arabic Language and Literature, Cell and Molecular Biology [ May 2012 ], Civil Engineering, Electrical and Computer Engineering, Environmental [ May 2012 ] and Water Resources Engineering, Mechanical Engineering and Theoretical Physics. College Hall [ Medical Center ] The AUB Medical Center ( AUBMC ) is the private, not-for-profit teaching center of the Faculty of Medicine. The AUB Medical Center (AUBMC), which is accredited by the Joint Commission International (JCIA) on hospital accreditation, includes a 420-bed hospital and offers comprehensive tertiary/quaternary medical care and referral services in a wide range of specialties and medical, nursing and paramedical training programs at undergraduate and post-graduate level. Since 1905, AUB’s medical services have included a nursing school. In 2008, the American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN) invited AUB’s Rafic Hariri School of Nursing to become a full member, making it the first member of the AACN outside the United States. The American Nurses Credentialing Center &apos;s (ANCC) Magnet Recognition Program awarded AUBMC its prestigious Magnet designation on June 23, 2009. AUBMC is the first healthcare institution in the Middle East and the third in the world outside the United States to receive this award. On April 4th, 2011, the American University of Beirut (AUB) announced an ambitious plan for the development and implementation of a new AUBMC 2020 Medical Complex. The AUBMC 2020 Medical Complex will lead to the growth of the hospital from an approximately 350-bed institution to a 600-bed medical complex that will also include new adult and pediatric hospitals, the creation of specialized centers of excellence in oncology, neuroscience, heart and vascular disease, amongst others, as well as an expansion in the existing services and buildings. Another component to AUBMC’s growth, will be the recruitment of top-caliber, highly specialized and accomplished faculty, and the creation of a Heart and Vascular Center and a Multiple Sclerosis Center. {. AUB. Retrieved on 2012-4-29. } [ University Museum ] The Archaeological Museum of the American University of Beirut is the third oldest museum in the Near East with displays covering all periods of history. The museum also carries out archaeological research projects. [ Libraries ] Football field at AUB lower campus The American University of Beirut (AUB) library system includes two main divisions: [ University libraries ] The university libraries include the Nami Jafet Memorial Library, the Engineering and Architecture Library and the Science and Agriculture Library. The Agricultural Research and Education Center (AREC) in the Beqa&apos;a Valley also includes an annex to the Science and Agriculture Library. { Home – Academics – Libraries. AUB. Retrieved on 2010-11-04. } [ Saab Medical Library ] The Saab Medical Library (SML) serves the AUB Faculty of Medicine and Medical Center, Faculty of Health Sciences, the Rafic Hariri School of Nursing, in addition to the entire AUB campus. { Welcome to Saab Medical Library. Smlweb.aub.edu.lb (2010-04-19). Retrieved on 2010-11-04. } Although many library resources are accessible remotely from on and off campus, the libraries themselves are equipped with e-classrooms, computer labs, and wireless connectivity. Trained and experienced library staff conduct classes and workshops throughout the year to introduce and train users to take advantage of the libraries’ collections, information resources, and innovative technologies. [ Fundraising ] { Mediterranean Sea. } In October 2002, the American University of Beirut launched a five-year $150 million fund raising campaign called the Campaign for Excellence to celebrate its 140th anniversary in 2006–07. The University raised more than $171 million during the campaign, which ended in December 2007, to upgrade its facilities, strengthen academic programs, enhance faculty recruitment, and increase its financial aid budget. [ Accreditation ] Degrees awarded by the American University of Beirut are officially registered with the Ministry of Higher Education in Lebanon and with the Board of Education in the State of New York. AUB was granted institutional accreditation in June 2004 by the Commission on Higher Education of the Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools. The University’s accreditation was most recently reaffirmed in June 2009. In September 2006, the Council on Education for Public Health (CEPH) acted to accredit the University’s Graduate Public Health Program in the Faculty of Health Sciences (FHS). The AUB Graduate Public Health Program is the first CEPH accredited public health program outside the North American continent. The Commission on Collegiate Nursing Education (CCNE) accredited AUB’s Rafic Hariri School of Nursing for five years beginning October 13, 2007. In April 2009, the Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business ( AACSB ) granted the Suliman S. Olayan School of Business (OSB) initial accreditation. AACSB is the leading international accrediting agency for undergraduate, master’s, and doctoral degree programs in business administration and accounting. Less than five percent of business schools worldwide have earned AACSB International accreditation. { OSB joins ranks of 5 percent of business schools in the world with AACSB accreditation, AUB News Highlights (Official Press Release) } AUB&apos;s Olayan School of Business is the first business school in Lebanon and the second in the region to receive such accreditation. The Faculty of Engineering and Architecture at the American University of Beirut received accreditation from the Accreditation Board of Engineering and Technology ( ABET ) in July 2010, becoming the first university in Lebanon to receive such an accreditation. The accredited programs include the undergraduate BE degrees in civil engineering, computer and communications engineering, electrical and computer engineering, and mechanical engineering. { Undergraduate engineering degree programs receive internationally-recognized [[ABET ] accreditation, AUB News Highlights (Official Press Release)] } The most important donor of FEA was Mohamad Nasser-Eddine (Major donation on 2 June 2009) [ Board of Trustees ] The reconstructed College Hall at AUB The American University of Beirut (AUB) is governed by an autonomous Board of Trustees consisting of a wide array of high accomplished personnel, most notably: [ May 2012 ] Ray R. Irani, PhD (Billionaire &amp; Executive Chairman, Occidental Petroleum Corporation, Los Angeles, California ) Michael I. Fares (Billionaire &amp; Private Investor, London, UK ) Carlos Ghosn (Billionaire &amp; President and Chief Executive Officer, Nissan Motor Co., Ltd. Tokyo, Japan; President and Chief Executive Officer, Renault, Paris, France ) Dr. David R. Bickers (Vice Chairman for Medicine and Health &amp; Carl Truman Nelson Professor and Chairman, at the College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University Medical Center; and Director of Dermatology Service, Columbia Campus, New York Presbyterian Hospital, Manhattan, New York ) Randa El-Sayed Haffar (Director, Citi Private Bank, New York, New York ) Saad Hariri (Former Prime Minister of Lebanon ) Abdulla Al-Thani, PhD (Vice President of the Qatar Foundation, Doha, Qatar ) W. Ronnie Coffman, PhD (International Professor College of Agriculture and Life Sciences Cornell University, Ithaca, New York ) Philip S. Khoury, PhD (Ford International Professor of History and Associate Provost, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts ) Dr. Huda Y. Zoghbi (Professor, Departments of Pediatrics, Molecular and Human Genetics, Neurology, and Neuroscience, Houston, Texas ) Marwan Muasher, PhD (Vice President for Studies, Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, Washington, DC ) Ambassador Frank G. Wisner ( International Affairs Advisor at Patton Boggs LLP. New York, New York ) Najib Mikati Prime Minster of Lebanon [ Notable alumni ] Nineteen former AUB students were delegates to the signing of the United Nations Charter in 1945. { News from ICTP 98 – Features – CAMS. Ictp.trieste.it (1999-01-15). Retrieved on 2010-11-04. } The most famous among them was Charles Malik, a Lebanese philosopher, diplomat and president of the United Nations General Assembly from 1958 to 1959. { Glendon, M.A., 1999. Foundations of Human Rights: The Unfinished Business. American Journal of Jurisprudence, 44, pp. 1–14 } [ Selected list of alumni and former students ] Listed alphabetically by last name [ Afghanistan ] AUB Alumni Asrhaf Ghani Ahmadzai chatting with U.S. Ambassador to Afghanistan Ashraf Ghani Ahmadzai (Former Minister of Finance, Presidential Candidate in 2009 Afghan Presidential Elections) Yousef Pashtun (Minister of Urban Development, former Governor of Kandahar Province) [ Bahrain ] Yusuf Al-Shirawi (Former Minister of Trade and Industry) Ali Fakhro (Former Minister Health between 1972 and 1982, and Education between 1982 and 1995. The first Bahrain i medical doctor ) Abdulrahman Mohammed Jamsheer (Leading businessman and Chairman of the Foreign Affairs, Defence and National Security of the Shura Council in the Kingdom of Bahrain ) Afnan Zayyani (Businesswoman, Board Member of the Bahrain Chamber of Commerce - Transferred to Texas Tech University during the Lebanese War 1975-1990 ) [ Canada ] Mona Nemer (Vice President - Research, The University of Ottawa - Transferred to Wichita State University during the Lebanese War) [ Egypt ] Sahar Sallab (businesswoman and former Deputy Minister of Trade and Industry) [ France ] Lina Mroue (founder of the French chain of restaurants Lina&apos;s ) [ Iran ] Shoghi Effendi Rabbani (head of the Bahá&apos;í Faith 1921–1957) Ali Akbar Salehi (Foreign Minister, and former Head of the Iran Nuclear Agency) [ Iraq ] AUB Alumni and former Prime Minister of Iraq Sa&apos;dun Hammadi [ May 2012 ] Abdul-Jabbar Abdullah (Scientist and academic, the second president of the University of Baghdad )) Mohammed Tawfiq Allawi (Minister of Communications) Fadhil Al-Jamali (Prime Minister) Adnan Al-Pachachi (Foreign Minister and President/Member of the Interim Ruling Council) Khalil M. H. Al-Shamma&apos; (Professor Of Banking And Finance, Vice President Of the Arab Academy for Banking And Financial Sciences, Chairman,Board Of Directors Of PCT Group ) Matti Aqrawi (Academic, the first president of the University of Baghdad ) Ali Al-Wardi ( Anthropologist and social historian ) Taha Baqir ( Archaeologist and scholar ) Zaha Hadid ( Architect ) Saadun Hammadi (Prime Minister &amp; Speaker) Hafiz Jameel (Famous poet) [ Japan ] Shigeru Endo (Ambassador to Tunisia and Saudi Arabia ) [ Jordan ] Hussein Fakhri Al-Khalidi (Prime Minister) Suleyman Al-Nabulsi (Prime Minister) Wasfi Al-Tall (Prime Minister) Abdul Hamid Sharaf (Prime Minister) Ahmad Touqan (Prime Minister) Abdul Raouf Al-Rawabdeh (Prime Minister) Rima Khalaf (Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Finance, and senior UN official) Leila Najjar-Sharaf (Second woman Minister and current member of the Upper House &quot; Majlis Al-A&apos;yan &quot; ) Kadri Touqan (Foreign Minister and academic) Umayya Touqan (Finance Minister, and former Governor of the Jordanian Central Bank ) Akram Zu&apos;eiter (Foreign Minister, Ambassador and Writer) [ Kuwait ] Abdul Rahman Al-Awadhi (Former Minister of Health) Ahmad Al-Khatib (One of the earliest parliamentarians) Rula Dashti (One of the first four women members of Parliament - Transferred to California State University - Chico during the Lebanese War) H.H. Sheikha Hassa Saad Al-Abdullah Al-Sabah (President of Kuwaiti Business Women Committee since 1999) [ Lebanon ] AUB Alumni and Lebanese Prime Minister Najib Mikati Wael Abu Faour (Minister of Social Affairs) Salim Al-Hoss (Prime Minister) Mohammad Al Safadi (Minister of Finance) Jibran Bassil (Minister of Energy) Bassel Fleihan (Minister of Economy, assassinated in 2005)) Bilal Hamad (Mayor of Beirut) Wafaa Dikhah Hamze (one of Lebanon&apos;s first two women ministers) Walid Jumblat (Leader of the Progressive Socialist Party, member of parliament and former cabinet minister) Nazem El-Khoury (Minister of Environment) Najib Mikati (Prime Minister, billionaire and co-founder of Investcom ) Tony Nader (&apos;First Sovereign Ruler&apos; of the Global Country of World Peace ) Emily Nasrallah (Writer and women&apos;s rights activist) Adel Osseiran (Speaker of Parliament and Cabinet Minister) Nadim Kassar (Banker) Mohammed Rawwas (Professor of Marketing and Fulbright Senior Specialist, University of Northern Iowa) Riad Salameh (Governor of the Central Bank of Lebanon ) Kamal Salibi (Historian) Fouad Siniora (Prime Minister) Ghassan Tueini (Deputy Prime Minister, journalist and publisher of An-Nahar newspaper) [ Malaysia ] Mohamad Noah bin Omar, First speaker of Malaysian Parliament (Dewan Rakyat), also the father-in-law of the second and third prime minister of Malaysia. [ The Maldives ] Mohammad Waheed Hassan, President of The Malidives - elected 2012 [ Palestine ] AUB Alumni and Palestinian Prime Minister Salam Fayyad meeting with George W. Bush Haidar Abdul-Shafi (Politician and physician) Salma Al-Khadra Al-Jayyusi (Academic and poet) Suad Amiry (Writer and architect ) Hanan Ashrawi (Academic and politician) Salam Fayyad (Prime Minister of the Palestinian authority ) George Habash (Physician and Politician – leader of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine ) Nabeel Kassis ( Nuclear physicist and politician) Hanna Nasser (Founding president of Birzeit University ) Kamal Nasser (Famous Poet, political leader and member of the Jordanian parliament ) Ibrahim Touqan (Famous Poet) [ Saudi Arabia ] Badriya Al-Bishr (Writer) Yaqoub Rasheed Ad-Dughaither ( Historian ) Abdullah Jum&apos;ah (Former President, Director, and CEO of Saudi Aramco ) Abdul Aziz Al-Mu&apos;ammar - Special Royal Advisor during the reign of King Saud ibn Abdul Aziz (1953–1964) Hayat S. Olayan (Businesswoman) Hutham S. Olayan (Businesswoman and member of the Board of Trustees of the American University of Beirut ) Farida Al-Sulayman (First Saudi woman medical doctor ) [ Sudan ] Ismail al-Azhari (First President of independent Sudan ) Yusuf Badri (Founder of Al-Ahfad University, Sudan&apos;s first private university) [ Syria ] { World Economic Forum } Nazim Al-Qudsi (President and Prime Minister) Faris Al-Khoury (Prime Minister and Speaker of the House ) Mansour Al-Atrash (Head of the National Revolutionary Council 1965–1966) Abdel Rahman Ash-Shahbandar (Physician, nationalist leader and minister) Madani Al-Khiyami (Health Minister and physician) Ghada Al-Samman ( Novelist and writer) Omar Abu Rishah ( Ambassador and famous poet) Hassaan Mureiwid (Foreign Minister) Costantine Zurayk (Academic and historian) [ USA ] Abdulfattah John Jandali ( Steve Jobs &apos; biological father) Charles W Hostler (Former American Ambassador to Bahrain) Ray Irani (Chairman &amp; CEO, Occidental Petroleum ) Malcolm Kerr (Academic, former president of AUB, former professor at UCLA ) Zalmay Khalilzad (Former American Ambassador to the United Nations and Afghanistan) Fawwaz T. Ulaby (Inventor and electrical engineer) Hassan Kamel Al-Sabbah ( Mathematician, inventor, and electrical engineer) [ See also ] [ Lebanon United States University ] American University (disambiguation) for a list of similarly-named institutions [ References ] [ 2 ] [ External links ] [ http://www.aub.edu.lb ] Middle States Commission on Higher Education Category:Universities in Lebanon Category:Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools Category:Educational institutions established in 1866 Category:Education in Beirut [[hy:Բեյր ar:الجامعة الأميركية في بيروت de:Amerikanische Universität Beirut eo:Usona universitato de Bejruto fa:دانشگاه آمریکایی بیروت fr:Université américaine de Beyrouth hy:Բեյրութի ամերիկյան համալսարան id:Universitas Amerika di Beirut it:Università americana di Beirut he:האוניברסיטה האמריקנית בביירות arz:الجامعه الامريكيه بيروت ja:ベイルート・アメリカン大学 pl:Uniwersytet Amerykański w Bejrucie ru:Американский Университет Бейрута simple:American University of Beirut sh:Američki univerzitet u Bejrutu tr:Beyrut Amerikan Üniversitesi zh:贝鲁特美国大学