Learned helplessness, as a technical term in animal psychology and related human psychology, means a condition of a human person or an animal in which it has learned to behave helplessly, even when the opportunity is restored for it to help itself by avoiding an unpleasant or harmful circumstance to which it has been subjected. Learned helplessness theory is the view that clinical depression and related mental illness es may result from a perceived absence of control over the outcome of a situation. [ Seligman M. E. P. 1975 Helplessness: On Depression, Development, and Death San Francisco W. H. Freeman 0-7167-2328-X ] Organisms which have been ineffective and less sensitive in determining the consequences of their behavior are defined as having acquired learned helplessness. [ Carlson Neil R. Psychology the science of behaviour 2010 Pearson Canada 409 978-0-205-69918-6 ] [ Foundation of research and theory ] [ Seligman and Maier ] The American psychologist Martin Seligman &apos;s foundational experiments and theory of learned helplessness began at the University of Pennsylvania in 1967, as an extension of his interest in depression. Quite by accident, Seligman and colleagues discovered that the conditioning of dogs led to outcomes that opposed the predictions of B.F. Skinner &apos;s behaviorism, then a leading psychological theory. { Seligman, M.E.P. &amp; Maier, S.F. (1967). Failure to escape traumatic shock. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 74, 1–9. } { Overmier, J.B. &amp; Seligman, M.E.P. (1967). Effects of inescapable shock upon subsequent escape and avoidance responding. Journal of Comparative and Physiological Psychology, 63, 28–33. } [ Experiment ] [ Summary ] In the learned helplessness experiment an animal is repeatedly hurt by an adverse stimulus which it cannot escape. Eventually the animal will stop trying to avoid the pain and behave as if it is utterly helpless to change the situation. Finally, when opportunities to escape are presented, this learned helplessness prevents any action. The only coping mechanism the animal uses is to be stoical and put up with the discomfort, not expending energy getting worked up about the adverse stimulus. [ Detail ] In Part 1 of Seligman and Steve Maier &apos;s experiment, three groups of dogs were placed in harnesses. Group 1 dogs were simply put in the harnesses for a period of time and later released. Groups 2 and 3 consisted of &quot; yoked pairs. &quot; A dog in Group 2 would be intentionally subjected to pain by being given electric shocks, which the dog could end by pressing a lever. A Group 3 dog was wired in series with a Group 2 dog, receiving shocks of identical intensity and duration, but his lever didn&apos;t stop the electric shocks. To a dog in Group 3, it seemed that the shock ended at random, because it was his paired dog in Group 2 that was causing it to stop. For Group 3 dogs, the shock was apparently &quot; inescapable. &quot; Group 1 and Group 2 dogs quickly recovered from the experience, but Group 3 dogs learned to be helpless, and exhibited symptoms similar to chronic clinical depression. In Part 2 of the Seligman and Maier experiment, these three groups of dogs were tested in a shuttle-box apparatus, in which the dogs could escape electric shocks by jumping over a low partition. For the most part, the Group 3 dogs, who had previously learned that nothing they did had any effect on the shocks, simply lay down passively and whined. Even though they could have easily escaped the shocks, the dogs didn&apos;t try. In a second experiment later that year, Overmier and Seligman ruled out the possibility that the Group 3 dogs learned some behavior in Part 1 of the experiment, while they were struggling in the harnesses against the &quot; inescapable shocks, &quot; that somehow interfered with what would have been their normal, successful behavior of escaping from the shocks in Part 2. The Group 3 dogs were immobilized with a paralyzing drug ( Curare ), and underwent a procedure similar to that in Part 1 of the Seligman and Maier experiment. A similar Part 2 in the shuttle-box was also undertaken in this experiment, and the Group 3 dogs exhibited the same &quot; helpless &quot; response. However, not all of the dogs in Seligman&apos;s experiments became helpless. Of the roughly 150 dogs in experiments in the latter half of the 1960s, about one-third did not become helpless, but instead managed to find a way out of the unpleasant situation despite their past experience with it. The corresponding characteristic in humans has been found to correlate highly with optimism : an explanatory style that views the situation as other than personal, pervasive, or permanent. This distinction between people who adapt and those who break down under long-term psychological pressure was also studied in the 1950s in the context of brainwashing. [ Later experiments ] Other experiments were performed with different animals with similar results. In all cases, the strongest predictor of a depressive response was lack of control over the aversive stimulus. One such later experiment, presented by Watson &amp; Ramey (1969), consisted of two groups of human babies. One group was placed into a crib with a sensory pillow, designed so that the movement of the baby&apos;s head could control the rotation of a mobile. The other group had no control over the movement of the mobile and could only enjoy looking at it. Later, both groups of babies were tested in cribs that allowed the babies to control the mobile. Although all the babies now had the power to control the mobile, only the group that had already learned about the sensory pillow attempted to use it. { Watson, J. &amp; Ramey, C. Reactions to response-contingent stimulation in early infancy. Revision of paper presented at biennial meeting of the Society for Research in Child Development. Santa Monica. California, March 1969. } A similar experiment was done with people who performed mental tasks in the presence of distracting noise. People who could use a switch to turn off the noise had improved performance, even though they rarely bothered to do so. Simply being aware of this option was enough to substantially counteract its distracting effect. { Hiroto, D.S. &amp; Seligman, M.E.P. (1975). Generality of learned helplessness in man. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 31, 311–27. } In 2011, an animal study in the Cooper laboratory found that animals with control over stress exhibited changes in the excitability of specific neurons within the prefrontal cortex and this has been modeled in a conductance-based neural simulation. { Varela JA, Wang J, Varnell AL &amp; Donald C. Cooper (2011) Control over stress induces plasticity of individual prefrontal cortical neurons: A conductance-based neural simulation. http://www.neuro-cloud.net/nature-precedings/varela Available from Nature Precedings http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/npre.2011.6267.1 } Animals that lacked control failed to exhibit an increase in excitability and showed signs consistent with learned helplessness and social anxiety. [ Attributional reformulation ] Later research discovered that the original theory of learned helplessness failed to account for people&apos;s varying reactions to situations that can cause learned helplessness. [ Peterson C. Park C. 1998 Learned helplessness and explanatory style D. F. Barone M. Hersen V. B. VanHasselt Advanced Personality New York Plenum Press 287–308 0-306-45745-8 ] Learned helplessness sometimes remains specific to one situation, [ Cole C. S. Coyne J. C. 1977 Situational specificity of laboratory-induced learned helplessness in humans Journal of Abnormal Psychology 86 6 615–623 10.1037/0021-843X.86.6.615 ] but at other times generalizes across situations. An individual&apos;s attributional style or explanatory style was the key to understanding why people responded differently to adverse events. { Peterson, C. &amp; Seligman, M.E.P. (1984). Causal explanations as a risk factor for depression: Theory and evidence. Psychological Review, 91, 347–74. } Although a group of people may experience the same or similar negative events, how each person privately interprets or explains the event will affect the likelihood of acquiring learned helplessness and subsequent depression. [ Abramson L. Y. Seligman M. E. P. Teasdale J. D. 1978 Learned helplessness in humans: Critique and reformulation Journal of Abnormal Psychology 87 1 49–74 10.1037/0021-843X.87.1.49 ] People with pessimistic explanatory style—which sees negative events as permanent ( &quot; it will never change &quot; ), personal ( &quot; it&apos;s my fault &quot; ), and pervasive ( &quot; I can&apos;t do anything correctly &quot; )—are most likely to suffer from learned helplessness and depression. [ Peterson C. Maier S. F. Seligman M. E. P. 1995 Learned Helplessness: A Theory for the Age of Personal Control New York Oxford University Press 0-19-504467-3 ] Cognitive behavioral therapy, heavily endorsed by Seligman, can often help people to learn more realistic explanatory styles, and can help ease depression. Bernard Weiner &apos;s attribution theory (1979, 1985, 1986) concerns the way that people attribute a cause or explanation to an unpleasant event. Attribution theory includes the dimensions of globality/specificity, stability/instability, and internality/externality. { Weiner, B. (1986). An attributional theory of motivation and emotion. New York: Springer-Verlag. } A global attribution occurs when the individual believes that the cause of negative events is consistent across different contexts. A specific attribution occurs when the individual believes that the cause of a negative event is unique to a particular situation. A stable attribution occurs when the individual believes the cause to be consistent across time. Unstable attribution occurs when the individual thinks that the cause is specific to one point in time. An external attribution assigns causality to situational or external factors, while an internal attribution assigns causality to factors within the person. [ Differences between humans and other animals ] There are several aspects of human helplessness that have no counterpart among other animals. One of the most intriguing aspects is &quot; vicarious learning (or modelling) &quot; : that people can learn to be helpless through observing another person encountering uncontrollable events. { Bandura A. (1986). } { Social foundations of thought and action: A social cognitive theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. ISBN 0-13-815614-X } Apart from the shared depression symptoms between human and other animals such as passivity, introjected hostility, weight loss, appetite loss, social and sexual deficits, some of the diagnostic symptoms of learned helplessness—including depressed mood, feelings of worthlessness, and suicidal ideation —can be found and observed in human beings but not necessarily in animals. In animal models, control over stress conveys resilience to future uncontrolled stressors and induces changes in the function of specific neurons within the prefrontal cortex. { Varela J., Wang J., Varnell A.L. &amp; Cooper DC (2011) Control over stress induces plasticity of individual prefrontal cortical neurons: A conductance-based neural simulation http://www.neuro-cloud.net/nature-precedings/varela } [ Health implications ] Whatever their origins, people who suffer uncontrollable events reliably see disruption of emotions, aggressions, physiology, and problem-solving tasks. { Roth, S. (1980). A revised model of learned helplessness in humans. Journal of Personality, 48, 103–33. } { Wortman, C.B. &amp; Brehm, J.W. (1975). Response to uncontrollable outcomes: An integration of reactance theory and the learned helplessness model. In Advances in experimental social psychology, L. Berkowitz, (ed.). Vol. 8. New York: Academic Press. } These helpless experiences can associate with passivity, uncontrollability and poor cognition in people, ultimately threatening their physical and mental well-being. [ Physical health ] Learned helplessness can contribute to poor health when people neglect diet, exercise, and medical treatment, falsely believing they have no power to change. The more people perceive events as uncontrollable and unpredictable, the more stress they experience, and the less hope they feel about making changes in their lives. { Henry, P.C. (2005). Life stress, explanatory style, hopelessness, and occupational stress. International Journal of Stress Management, 12, 241–56. } { Jones, Ishmael (2008, revised 2010). The Human Factor: Inside the CIA&apos;s Dysfunctional Intelligence Culture. New York: Encounter Books. ISBN 978-1-59403-223-3. } Young adults and middle-aged parents with a pessimistic explanatory style are often more likely to suffer from depression. { Chang, E.C. &amp; Sanna, L.J. (2007). Affectivity and psychological adjustment across tow adult generations: Does pessimistic explanatory style still matter? Personality and Individual Differences, 43, 1149–59. } People with a pessimistic explanatory style tend to be poor at problem-solving and cognitive restructuring, and also tend to demonstrate poor job satisfaction and interpersonal relationships in the workplace. { Welbourne, J.L.; Eggerth, D.; Hartley, T.A.; Andrew, M.E. &amp; Sanchez, F. (2007). Coping strategies in the workplace: Relationships with attributional style and job satisfaction. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 70, 312–25. } Those with a pessimistic explanatory style also tend to have weakened immune systems, and not only have increased vulnerability to minor ailments (e.g., cold, fever) and major illness (e.g., heart attack, cancers), but also have a less effective recovery from health problems. { Bennett, K.K.; &amp; Elliott, M. (2005). Pessimistic explanatory style and Cardiac Health: What is the relation and the mechanism that links them? Basic and applied social psychology, 27, 239–48. } [ Psychological health ] Learned helplessness can also be a motivation al problem. Individuals who have failed at tasks in the past conclude erroneously that they are incapable of improving their performance. { Stipek, D.E.P. (1988). Motivation to learning. Allyn &amp; Bacon: Boston. } This might set children behind in academic subjects and dampen their social skills. Children with learned helplessness typically fail academic subjects, and are less intrinsically motivated than others. They may use learned helplessness as an excuse or a shield to provide self-justification for school failure [ January 2012 ]. Additionally, describing someone as having learned to be helpless can serve as a reason to avoid blaming him or her for the inconveniences experienced [ January 2012 ]. In turn, the student will give up trying to gain respect or advancement through academic performance. { Ramirez, E.; Maldonado, A. &amp; Martos, R. (1992). Attribution modulate immunization against learned helplessness in humans. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 62, 139–46. } [ Social impact ] Child abuse by neglect can be a manifestation of learned helplessness: when parents believe they are incapable of stopping an infant&apos;s crying, they may simply give up trying to do anything for the child. { Donovan, W.L.; Leavitt, L.A. &amp; Walsh, R.O. (1990). Maternal self-efficacy: Illusory control and its effect on susceptibility to learned helplessness. Child Development, 61, 1638–47. } Another example of learned helplessness in social settings involves loneliness and shyness. Those who are extremely shy, passive, anxious and depressed may learn helplessness to offer stable explanations for unpleasant social experiences. However, Gotlib and Beatty (1985) found that people who cite helplessness in social settings may be viewed poorly by others, resulting in a situation that reinforces the problematic thinking. A third example is aging, with the elderly learning to be helpless and concluding that they have no control over losing their friends and family members, losing their jobs and incomes, getting old, weak and so on. { Rodin, J. (1986). Aging and health: Effects of the sense of control. Science, 233, 1271–6. } Social problems resulting from learned helplessness seem unavoidable; however, the effect goes away with the passage of time. { Young, L.D. &amp; Allin, J.M. (1986). Persistence of learned helplessness in humans. Journal of General Psychology, 113, 81–8. } Nonetheless, learned helplessness can be minimized by &quot; immunization &quot; and potentially reversed by therapy. People can be immunized against the perception that events are uncontrollable by increasing their awareness of previous positive experiences. { Altmaier, E.M. &amp; Happ, D.A. (1985). Coping skills training&apos;s immunization effects against learned helplessness. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 3, 181–9. } Therapy can instruct people in the fact of contingency { Thornton, J.W. &amp; Powell, G.D. (1974). Immunization to and alleviation of learned helplessness in man. American Journal of Psychology, 87, 351–67. } and bolster people&apos;s self esteem. { Orbach, E. &amp; Hadas, Z. (1982). The elimination of learned helplessness deficits as a function of induced self-esteem. Journal of Research in Personality, 16, 511–23. } [ Extensions ] Cognitive scientist and usability engineer Donald Norman used learned helplessness to explain why people blame themselves when they have a difficult time using simple objects in their environment. [ Norman Donald Donald Norman The Design of Everyday Things Basic Books New York 1988 978-0-465-06710-7 41–42 ] The American sociologist Harrison White has suggested in his book Identity and Control that the notion of learned helplessness can be extended beyond psychology into the realm of social action. When a culture or political identity fails to achieve desired goals, perceptions of collective ability suffer. According to author Jane Mayer, [ Six Questions for Jane Mayer, Author of The Dark Side Scott Horton http://www.harpers.org/archive/2008/07/hbc-90003234 Harper&apos;s Magazine 2008-07-14 Seligman said his talk was focused on how to help U.S. soldiers resist torture—not on how to breakdown resistance in detainees.... Mitchell has denied that these theories guided his and the CIA&apos;s use 2009-02-04 ] Seligman gave a talk at the Navy SERE school in San Diego in 2002, which he said was a three-hour talk on helping U.S. soldiers to resist torture, based on his understanding of learned helplessness, not on how to breakdown resistance in detainees. [ See also ] Explanatory style Fundamental attribution error Locus of control Pervasive refusal syndrome Somebody Else&apos;s Problem Learned optimism Learned industriousness [ References ] [ 30em ] [ External links ] [ Learnedhelplessness.ogg 2006-12-17 ] An introductory article on &quot; Learned Helplessness &quot; at noogenesis.com An in-depth discussion of &quot; Learned Helplessness &quot; with helpful charts and graphs at University of Plymouth&apos;s &quot; Study and Learning Materials On-line &quot; Lacking Control Increases Illusory Pattern Perception, Jennifer A. Whitson / Adam D. Galinsky, Science, 3 October 2008: Vol. 322. no. 5898, pp. 115–17, [ September 2010 ] Category:Behavioral concepts Category:Psychological attitude Category:Psychology experiments cs:Naučená bezmocnost de:Erlernte Hilflosigkeit fr:Impuissance apprise ko:학습된 무기력 hr:Naučena bespomoćnost he:חוסר אונים נרכש lt:Įgytas bejėgiškumas nl:Aangeleerde hulpeloosheid ja:学習性無力感 pl:Wyuczona bezradność ru:Выученная беспомощность sk:Naučená bezmocnosť sr:Научена беспомоћност sv:Inlärd hjälplöshet th:ความสิ้นหวังอันเกิดจากการเรียนรู้ uk:Навчена безпорадність zh:習得性失助