Glycosylation (see also chemical glycosylation ) is the reaction in which a carbohydrate, i.e. a glycosyl donor, is attached to a hydroxyl or other functional group of another molecule (a glycosyl acceptor ). In biology glycosylation refers to the enzymatic process that attaches glycans to protein s, lipid s, or other organic molecules. This enzymatic process produces one of the fundamental biopolymers found in cells (along with DNA, RNA, and proteins ). Glycosylation is a form of co-translational and post-translational modification. Glycans serve a variety of structural and functional roles in membrane and secreted proteins. [ 2nd Cold Spring Harbor Laboratories Press 978-0-87969-770-9 Ajit Varki (ed.) Essentials of Glycobiology 2009 edited by Ajit Varki... ] The majority of proteins synthesized in the rough ER undergo glycosylation. It is an enzyme -directed site-specific process, as opposed to the non-enzymatic chemical reaction of glycation. Glycosylation is also present in the cytoplasm and nucleus as the O-GlcNAc modification. Five classes of glycans are produced: N-linked glycans attached to a nitrogen of asparagine or arginine side-chain s O-linked glycans attached to the hydroxy oxygen of serine, threonine, tyrosine, hydroxylysine, or hydroxyproline side-chains, or to oxygens on lipids such as ceramide phospho-glycans linked through the phosphate of a phospho-serine; C-linked glycans, a rare form of glycosylation where a sugar is added to a carbon on a tryptophan side-chain glypiation, which is the addition of a GPI anchor that links proteins to lipids through glycan linkages. [ Purpose ] The carbohydrate chains attached to the target proteins serve various functions. [ 2nd Oxford University Press, USA 978-0-19-928278-4 Drickamer K M.E. Taylor Introduction to Glycobiology 2006 ] For instance, some proteins do not fold correctly unless they are glycosylated first. Also, polysaccharides linked at the amide nitrogen of asparagine in the protein confer stability on some secreted glycoproteins. Experiments have shown that glycosylation in this case is not a strict requirement for proper folding, but the unglycosylated protein degrades quickly. Glycosylation also plays a role in cell-cell adhesion (a mechanism employed by cells of the immune system ) via sugar-binding proteins called lectins, which recognize specific carbohydrate moieties. [ Glycoprotein Diversity ] Glycosylation increases diversity in the proteome, because almost every aspect of glycosylation can be modified, including: Glycosidic bond — the site of glycan linkage Glycan composition — the types of sugars that are linked to a given protein Glycan structure — can be unbranched or branched chains of sugars Glycan length — can be short- or long-chain oligosaccharides [ Mechanisms ] There are various mechanisms for glycosylation, although most share several common features: [ Roberts and Co. Publishers, Englewood, CO 0974707732 Walsh Christopher Posttranslational modification of proteins: Expanding nature&apos;s inventory 2006 ] Glycosylation, unlike glycation, is an enzymatic process. Indeed, glycosylation is thought to be the most complex post-translational modification, because of the large number of enzymatic steps involved. The donor molecule is often an activated nucleotide sugar The process is non-templated (unlike DNA transcription or protein translation ); instead, the cell relies on segregating enzymes into different cellular compartments (e.g., endoplasmic reticulum, cisternae in Golgi apparatus ). Therefore, glycosylation is a site-specific modification. [ Types of glycosylation ] [ N-linked glycosylation ] [ N-linked glycosylation ] N-linked glycosylation is the most common type of glycosidic bond and is important for the folding of some eukaryotic proteins and for cell-cell and cell- extracellular matrix attachment. The N-linked glycosylation process occurs in eukaryotes in the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum and widely in archaea, but very rarely in bacteria. [ O-linked glycosylation ] [ O-linked glycosylation ] O-linked glycosylation is a form of glycosylation that occurs in eukaryotes in the Golgi apparatus [ William G. Flynne Biotechnology and Bioengineering http://books.google.com/books?id%3DWEBBP5IYqJQC%26amp%3Bpg%3DPA45 13 November 2010 2008 Nova Publishers 978-1-60456-067-1 45– ], but also occurs in archaea and bacteria. [ Phospho-serine glycosylation ] Xylose, fucose, mannose, and GlcNAc phospho-serine glycans have been reported in the literature. Fucose and GlcNAc have been found only in Dictyostelium discoideum, mannose in Leishmania mexicana, and xylose in Trypanosoma cruzi. Mannose has recently been reported in a vertebrate, the mouse, Mus musculus, on the cell-surface laminin receptor alpha dystroglycan 4. It has been suggested this rare finding may be linked to the fact that alpha dystroglycan is highly conserved from lower vertebrates to mammals. { Yoshida-Moriguchi, T., et al (2010). Science. 327(5961):88-92. } [ C-mannosylation ] A mannose sugar is added to the first tryptophan residue in the sequence W-X-X-W (W indicates tryptophan; X is any amino acid). Thrombospondins are one of the most commonly C-modified proteins, although this form of glycosylation appears elsewhere as well. C-mannosylation is unusual because the sugar is linked to a carbon rather than a reactive atom such as nitrogen or oxygen. Recently, the first crystal structure of a protein containing this type of glycosylation has been determined - that of human complement component 8, PDB ID 3OJY. [ Formation of GPI anchors (glypiation) ] A special form of glycosylation is the formation of a GPI anchor. In this kind of glycosylation a protein is attached to a lipid anchor, via a glycan chain. (See also prenylation.) [ See also ] Glycorandomization Glycation Advanced glycation endproduct Chemical glycosylation Fucosylation [ References ] [ External links ] Online textbook of glycobiology with chapters about glycosylation GlyProt: In-silico N-glycosylation of proteins on the web NetNGlyc: The NetNglyc server predicts N-glycosylation sites in human proteins using artificial neural networks that examine the sequence context of Asn-Xaa-Ser/Thr sequons. Supplementary Material of the Book &quot; The Sugar Code &quot; Additional information on glycosylation and figures [ February 2011 ] Category:Posttranslational modification Category:Organic reactions Category:Carbohydrates Category:Carbohydrate chemistry ca:Glucosilació de:Glykosylierung et:Glükosüülimine es:Glicosilación fr:Glycosylation it:Glicosilazione he:גליקוזילציה nl:Glycosylatie ja:グリコシル化 pl:Glikozylacja pt:Glicosilação ru:Гликозилирование sl:Glikozilacija sr:Glikozilacija fi:Glykosylaatio sv:Glykosylering tr:Glikozilasyon uk:Глікозування zh:糖基化