[ the volcanic cone Mount Atlas ] [ Atlas Mountains Tizi&apos;n&apos;Toubkal.jpg Toubkal Mountain in Toubkal National Park in the High Atlas Algeria Morocco Tunisia Toubkal 4167 31 03 43 N 07 54 58 W Precambrian AtlasRange.jpg Location of the Atlas Mountains (colored red) across North Africa ] The Atlas Mountains ( Berber : idurar n Watlas, [ جبال الأطلس ] ) is a mountain range across a northern stretch of Africa extending about [ 2,500 km mi on ] through Morocco, Algeria, and Tunisia. The highest peak is Toubkal, with an elevation of [ 4167 m ft 0 ] in southwestern Morocco. The Atlas ranges separate the Mediterranean and Atlantic coastlines from the Sahara Desert. The population of the Atlas Mountains are mainly Berbers. The terms for &apos;mountain&apos; in some Berber languages are adrar and adras, believed to be cognate with the toponym. The mountains have been home to a number of plant and animal species unique in Africa, often more like those of Europe; many of them are endangered and some have already gone extinct. Examples include the Barbary Macaque, the Atlas Bear (Africa&apos;s only species of bear; now extinct), the Barbary Leopard, the Barbary stag, Barbary Sheep, the Barbary Lion (extinct in the wild), the Atlas Mountain Badger, the North African Elephant (extinct), the African Aurochs (extinct), Cuvier&apos;s Gazelle, the Northern Bald Ibis, Dippers, the Atlas mountain viper, the Atlas Cedar, the European Black Pine, and the Algerian Oak. [ Geology ] Map showing the location of the Atlas Mountains across North Africa The basement rock of most of Africa was formed in the Precambrian (approximately 4.54 - 0.57 billion years ago) and is much older than the Atlas mountains lying in Africa. The Atlas formed during three subsequent phases of Earth&apos;s history. The first tectonic deformation phase involves only the Anti-Atlas, which was formed in the Paleozoic Era (~300 million years ago) as the result of continental collision s. North America, Europe and Africa were connected millions of years ago. The tectonic boundary. The Anti-Atlas mountains are believed to have originally been formed as part of Alleghenian orogeny. These mountains were formed when Africa and America collided, and were once a chain rivaling today&apos;s Himalayas. Today, the remains of this chain can be seen in the Fall line in the eastern United States. Some remnants can also be found in the later formed Appalachians in North America. A second phase took place during the Mesozoic Era (before ~65 My) and consisted of a widespread extension of the Earth&apos;s crust that rift ed and separated the continents mentioned above. This extension was responsible for the formation of many thick intracontinental sedimentary basin s including the present Atlas. Most of the rocks forming the surface of the present High Atlas were deposited under the ocean at that time. Finally, in the Tertiary Period (~65 million to ~1.8 million years ago), the mountain chains that today comprise the Atlas were uplifted as the land masses of Europe and Africa collided at the southern end of the Iberian peninsula. Such convergent tectonic boundaries occur where two plates slide towards each other forming a subduction zone (if one plate moves underneath the other) and/or a continental collision (when the two plates contain continental crust ). In the case of the Africa-Europe collision, it is clear that tectonic convergence is partially responsible for the formation of the High Atlas, as well as for the closure of the Strait of Gibraltar and the formation of the Alps and the Pyrenees. However, there is a lack of evidence for the nature of the subduction in the Atlas region, or for the thickening of the Earth&apos;s crust generally associated with continental collisions. In fact, one of the most striking features of the Atlas to geologists is the relative small amount of crustal thickening and tectonic shortening despite the important altitude of the mountain range. Recent studies suggest that deep processes rooted in the Earth&apos;s mantle may have contributed to the uplift of the High and Middle Atlas. { UAB.es Potential field modelling of the Atlas } { lithosphere } { UAB.es Crustal structure under the central High Atlas Mountains (Morocco) from geological and gravity data, P. Ayarza, et al., 2005, Tectonophysics, 400, 67-84 } [ Natural resources ] The Atlas are rich in natural resources. There are deposits of iron ore, lead ore, copper, silver, mercury, rock salt, phosphate, marble, anthracite coal, and gas among other resources. [ Subranges of the Atlas Mountains ] High Atlas. The range can be divided into four general regions from west to east: Middle Atlas, High Atlas, and Anti-Atlas (Morocco). Saharan Atlas (Algeria). Tell Atlas (Algeria, Tunisia). Aurès Mountains (Algeria, Tunisia). [ Middle Atlas range ] [ Middle Atlas ] The Middle Atlas is a portion of the Atlas mountain range lying completely in Morocco. The Middle Atlas is the westernmost of three Atlas Mountains chains that define a large, plateaued basin extending eastward into Algeria. South of the Middle Atlas and separated by the Moulouya and Oum Er-Rbia rivers, the High Atlas stretches for [ 700 km mi ] with a succession of peaks among which ten reach above [ 4000 m ft ]. North of the Middle Atlas and separated by the Sebou River, the Rif mountains are an extension of the Baetic Cordillera (Baetic mountains, which include the Sierra Nevada ) in the south of Spain. [ High Atlas ] [ High Atlas ] The High Atlas in central Morocco rises in the west at the Atlantic coast and stretches in an eastern direction to the Moroccan-Algerian border. At the Atlantic and to the southwest the range drops abruptly and makes an impressive transition to the coast and the Anti-Atlas range. To the north, in the direction of Marrakech, the range descends less abruptly. On the heights of Ouarzazate the massif is cut through by the Draa valley which opens southward. In this chaos of rocks the contrasts are astonishing: water runs in some places, forming clear basins. It is mainly inhabited by Berber people, who live in small villages and cultivate the high plains of Ourika Valley. { hydroelectric } { dam (far right) } Near Barrage Cavagnac, there is a hydroelectric dam that has created the artificial lake Lalla Takerkoust. The lake serves also as a source for fish for the local fishermen. The largest villages and towns of the area are Tahanaoute, Amizmiz, Imlil, Tin Mal, Ijoukak, and Oukaïmden. [ Anti-Atlas ranges ] [ Anti-Atlas ] The Anti-Atlas extends from the Atlantic Ocean in the southwest of Morocco toward the northeast to the heights of Ouarzazate and further east to the city of Tafilalt (altogether a distance of approximately [ 500 km mi s ] ). In the south it borders the Sahara. The easternmost point of the anti-Atlas is the Djebel Sarhro mountains and its eastern boundary is set by sections of the High Atlas range. [ Saharan Atlas range ] [ Saharan Atlas ] The Saharan Atlas of Algeria is the eastern portion of the Atlas mountain range. Though not as high as the Grand Atlas, they are far more imposing than the Tell Atlas range that runs to the north of them and closer to the coast. The highest peak in the range is the [ 2236 m ft on ] high Djebel Aissa. They mark the northern edge of the Sahara Desert. The mountains see some rainfall and are better suited to agriculture than the plateau region to the north. Today most of the population of the region are Berbers ( Imazighen ). [ Tell Atlas range ] [ Tell Atlas ] { Morocco - High Atlas Mountains). } The Tell Atlas is a mountain chain over [ 1500 km mi ] in length, belonging to the Atlas mountain ranges and stretching from Morocco, through Algeria to Tunisia. It parallels the Mediterranean coast. Together with the Saharan Atlas to the south it forms the northernmost of two more or less parallel ranges which gradually approach one another towards the east, merging in Eastern Algeria. At the western ends at the Middle Atlas range in Morocco. The area immediately to the south of this range is high plateau, with lakes in the wet season and salt flats in the dry. [ Aurès mountain range ] [ Aurès Mountains ] Aures Mountains Aures localisation The Aurès Mountains of Algeria and Tunisia are the farthest eastern portion of the Atlas mountain range. [ See also ] Capsian culture North Africa [ References and notes ] [ Atlas Mountains ] Category:Mountain ranges of Africa Category:Maghreb Category:Mountain ranges of Morocco Category:Mountain ranges of Algeria Category:Mountains of Tunisia Category:Physiographic provinces af:Atlasgebergte ar:جبال الأطلس be:Горная сістэма Атлас be-x-old:Атляс (горы) bg:Атласки планини br:Menezioù Atlas ca:Serralada de l&apos;Atles cs:Atlas (pohoří) cy:Mynyddoedd yr Atlas da:Atlasbjergene de:Atlas (Gebirge) et:Atlase mäed es:Atlas (cordillera) eo:Atlasa Montaro eu:Atlasa fa:کوه‌های اطلس fr:Atlas (massif) fy:Atlasberchtme gl:Cordal do Atlas ko:아틀라스 산맥 hi:एटलस पर्वत hr:Atlas (gorje) id:Pegunungan Atlas is:Atlasfjöll it:Atlante (catena montuosa) he:הרי האטלס la:Atlas (mons) lt:Atlaso kalnai hu:Atlasz (hegység) mn:Атласын нуруу nl:Atlasgebergte ja:アトラス山脈 no:Atlasfjellene nn:Atlasfjella oc:Atlàs (massís) pnb:کوہ اطلس pl:Atlas (góry) pt:Cordilheira do Atlas ro:Munții Atlas ru:Атлас (горы) sq:Malet Atllas simple:Atlas Mountains sk:Atlas (pohorie) sl:Atlas (gorovje) sr:Атлас (планине) fi:Atlasvuoret sv:Atlasbergen th:เทือกเขาแอตลาส tg:Кӯҳҳои Атлас tr:Atlas Dağları uk:Атлаські гори ur:کوہ اطلس vi:Dãy núi Atlas zh:阿特拉斯山脈