[ November 2011 ] [ November 2011 ] India, being a culturally diverse and fervent society, celebrates various holidays and festivals. There are three national holidays in India: Independence Day (India), Republic Day (India) and Gandhi Jayanti. States and regions have local festivals depending on prevalent religious and linguistic demographics. Popular religious festivals include the Hindu festivals of Diwali, Ganesh Chaturthi, Holi, Dussehra, Islamic festivals of Eid ul-Fitr, Eid al-Adha, Mawlid an-Nabī and Christian festivals of Christmas and days of observances such as Good Friday are observed throughout the country. Muharram, the starting of the Islamic new year is observed by many sects of Islam. In addition, the Sikh festivals such as Guru Nanak Jayanti, the Christian festivals such as Christmas, Good Friday and Jain festivals like Mahavir Jayanti, Paryushan are celebrated in certain areas where these religions have a significant following.The annual holidays are widely observed by state and local governments; however, they may alter the dates of observance or add or subtract holidays according to local custom. [ National holidays ] thumb National holidays are observed in all states and union territories. India has three national day s. { National Portal of India : Know India : AT A GLANCE } They are: Date English name 26 January Republic Day 15 August Independence Day 2 October Mahatma Gandhi&apos;s Birthday [ Ayyavazhi holidays ] Holiday Observed in Ayya Vaikunda Avataram Tamil Nadu Thousands take part in Ayya Vaikundar Avatar day - The Hindu, India&apos;s National Daily, 04-03-2012, &apos; &quot; The government had also declared a restricted holiday on Saturday, for the first time, in the State in view of Ayya Vaikundar Avatar day. &quot; &apos; [ Buddhist holidays ] Holiday Observed in Losar Sikkim, Ladakh Buddha Purnima Andaman &amp; Nicobar, Arunachal Pradesh,Tripura, Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Delhi, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu &amp; Kashmir, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Mizoram, Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh [ Christian holidays ] Date Holiday Observed in Good Friday all states and territories except Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu &amp; Kashmir, Punjab, Rajasthan and Tripura Easter Sunday all states and territories except Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu &amp; Kashmir, Punjab, Rajasthan and Tripura 8 September Feast of the Blessed Virgin Tamil Nadu, Goa, Kerala 3 December Feast of St. Francis Xavier Goa 25 December Christmas Day all states and territories [ Hindu holidays ] { Holi. } Hindus celebrate a number of festivals all through the year. From celebrating the advent of spring to celebrating the win of good over evil, Hindu religion and culture provide its followers endless reasons to celebrate. Given below is the list of just a few of these festivals that are celebrated with great zest and fervor. For dates see: [ Hindu festivals ] Holiday Observed in Bhogi Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu Pongal / Sankranti Andaman &amp; Nicobar, Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam [as Magh Bihu], Bihar [as Makar Sankranti], Gujarat [as Uttarayan], Karnataka, Orissa[as Makar Sankranti], Pondicherry, Tamil Nadu, Rajasthan Thiruvalluvar Day Pondicherry, Tamil Nadu Uzhavar Thirunal (Farmers&apos; Day) Tamil Nadu Vasant Panchami / Saraswati Puja Orissa, Tripura, West Bengal, Bihar Maha Shivaratri Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Chandigarh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu &amp; Kashmir, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Manipur, Orissa, Rajasthan, Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, West Bengal, Haryana Naag Panchami or Guga-Navami all states and territories except Goa Holi (Aka, Dol) all states and territories except Karnataka, Kerala, Nagaland, Pondicherry, Tamil Nadu and Tripura Maharishi Parasuram Jayanti Karnataka, Uttar Pradesh Rath Jatra Orissa Raksha Bandhan (Aka, Rákhi Púrńimá) Andhra Pradesh,Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, West Bengal, Rajasthan, Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Jharkhand, Bihar, Haryana, Orissa, Punjab Krishna Janmashtami Kerala, Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Chandigarh, Delhi, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu &amp; Kashmir, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Maharashtra, West Bengal Ganesh Chaturthi Kerala, Goa, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Andhra Pradesh, Pondicherry, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka Onam Kerala, Pondicherry Raja Parba Orissa Mahalaya Karnataka, West Bengal, Assam, Orissa Dussehra (Aka, Durgá Pujá) all states holiday for 2 days in Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Kerala, Nagaland, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Uttarakhand and Uttar Pradesh holiday for 3 days in Orissa, Assam, Madhya Pradesh, Meghalaya and Tripura holiday for 6 days in West Bengal 11th day Bhashani Utchhav in Orissa Lakshmi Puja / Kumara Purnima Orissa, Assam, Madhya Pradesh, Meghalaya, West Bengal and Tripura Diwali (Aka, Káli Puja and Diipávali) all states and territories observed for 2 days in Assam, West Bengal, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Uttarakhand and Uttar Pradesh holiday for 5 days in Gujarat Hartalika Teej Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh Sharad Poornima Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Chhatisgarh Bhai Duj (Aka, Bhái photá) Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra Jagaddhatri Puja West Bengal Visvakarma Puja Orissa, West Bengal Nuakhai Orissa Chhath Bihar, Jharkhand, Uttar Pradesh [ Islamic holidays ] Holiday Observed in Day of Ashura 10th Day of Muharram Andaman &amp; Nicobar, Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Chandigarh, Chhattisgarh, Delhi, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu &amp; Kashmir, Karnataka,Kerala Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Jharkhand Mawlid Eid-e-Milād-un-Nabī Baarah Wafaat Prophet&apos;s Birthday Andaman &amp; Nicobar, Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Karnataka,Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Mizoram, Pondicherry, Tamil Nadu, Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Jharkhand Shab-e-Barat Mid-Sha&apos;ban Jammu and Kashmir, Haryana, Delhi, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Bihar, Jahrkhand, West Bengal, Assam, Tripura, Madhya Pradesh, Chattisgarh, Rajasthan, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu Birthday of Ali ibn Abi talib Terah Rajab Hazrat Ali Uttar Pradesh and Bihar Jumat-ul-Wida Alvida Last Friday in Ramadan Jammu &amp; Kashmir, Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh Eid ul-Fitr Eid End of Ramadan all states and territories Eid al-Adha Bakr-Eid Feast of the Sacrifice all states and territories [ Jain holidays ] Holiday Observed in Mahavir Jayanti Andaman &amp; Nicobar, Bihar, Chandigarh, Delhi, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, [ Parsee (Zoroastrian) holidays ] { Note: The Parsis in India use a } { Shahenshahi calendar, unlike the } { Iran ians who use a } { Kadmi calendar. The North Americans and European } { Parsi s have adapted their own version of the } { Fasli calendar. This is however looked down upon by a lot of the Parsis in North America, who continue to use the Shahenshai calendar. These differences cause changes in the dates of the holidays. For example, the } { Zoroastrian New Year falls in the spring for the Iranians but in the summer for the Parsis } Holiday Observed in Nowruz (Parsee New Year) Gujarat, Maharashtra [ Ravidassia holidays ] Holiday Observed in Guru Ravidass Jayanti Chandigarh, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Punjab, Delhi, Rajasthan,Jammu &amp; Kashmir, Maharashtra, Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Assam, Madhya Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh. [ Sikh holidays ] Holiday Observed in Guru Gobind Singh Ji Gurpurab Chandigarh, Himachal Pradesh, Punjab Martyrdom of Guru Arjan Dev Ji Punjab Vaisakhi Andaman &amp; Nicobar, Assam, Chandigarh, Chhattisgarh, Delhi, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu &amp; Kashmir, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Nagaland, Punjab, Rajasthan, Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal Guru Nanak Dev Ji Gurpurab Andaman &amp; Nicobar, Assam, Chandigarh, Chhattisgarh, Delhi, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu &amp; Kashmir, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Nagaland, Punjab, Rajasthan, Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal [ Secular holidays ] In addition to the official holidays, many religious, ethnic, and other traditional holidays populate the calendar, as well as observances proclaimed by officials and lighter celebrations. These are rarely observed by Central government and businesses as holidays. For 2012 dates, please see Public Holidays India 2012 Date Holiday Observed in 1 January New Year&apos;s Day Most of India 23 January Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose&apos;s Birthday Orissa, Tripura, West Bengal 19 February Maharaja Shivaji&apos;s Birthday Maharashtra 15 March Kanshi Ram&apos;s Birthday Uttar Pradesh 22 March Bihar Day Bihar 30 March Rajasthan Day Rajasthan 1 April Utkal Dibasa (Orissa day) Orissa 14 April Dr. B. R. Ambedkar&apos;s Birthday Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Chandigarh, Gujarat, Haryana, Jammu &amp; Kashmir, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, Orissa, Pondicherry, Tamil Nadu, Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh 2nd Day of Chaitra, March–April Cheti Chand (Sindhi New Year) Gujarat, Uttar Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Delhi, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh 1st Day of Chaitra, March–April Gudi Padva (Marathi New Year) Goa, Maharashtra 1st Day of Chaitra, March–April Ugadi (Kannada and Telugu New Year) Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Pondicherry, Tamil Nadu 15 April Bihu (Assamese New Year) Assam 15 April Maha Vishuva Sankranti / Pana Sankranti (Oriya New Year) Orissa 14/15 April Pohela Boishakh (Bengali New Year) Tripura, West Bengal 1st Day of Chithirai, March–April Vishu / Varusha Pirappu or Puthandu (Malayali &amp; Tamil New Year) Kerala, Tamil Nadu 1 May Labour Day Assam, Bihar, Goa, Karnataka, Kerala, Manipur, Pondicherry, Tamil Nadu, Tripura, West Bengal, Orissa 1 May Maharashtra Day Maharashtra 1 May Gujarat Day Gujarat 16 May Annexation Day Sikkim 15 June Maharana Pratap Jayanti Rajasthan Purnima of Ashvin Month Valmiki Jayanthi Karnataka 26 October Accession Day Jammu and Kashmir 31 October Sardar Patel Jayanti Gujarat 1 November Andhra Pradesh Foundation Day Andhra Pradesh Karnataka Foundation Day Karnataka Kerala Foundation Day Kerala Chhattisgarh Foundation Day Chhattisgarh 3rd Day Of Kartika (month) Krishna Paksha Kanaka Jayanti Karnataka 7 December Armed Forces Flag Day Indian military [ Issues with large number of holidays ] While having so many Government Holidays keep in line with the idea of peaceful co-existence of all religions, there have been demands from various public bodies that the system of a multitude of religious holidays is hampering economic activities to a great extent. The past two Central Govt. Pay Commissions [1] have recommended the abolition of all Central Govt. Holidays on religious festivals, and instead, substitute with three national Holidays, i.e., Independence Day (15 August), Republic Day (26 January) and Gandhi Jayanti (2 October). It was also recommended to increase the amount of existing Restricted Holidays (Optional Holidays) depending on one&apos;s religious persuasion from existing two to eight. The rationale being, 8 holidays can more than cater for the festivals of any particular religion. So there is no point in having more than these many number of holidays, since religion does not warrant a Hindu to celebrate Id or a Muslim to celebrate Diwali. With the proposed system, however, it was left to the individual to choose which 8 Holidays to celebrate, irrespective of his religious belief. However, this recommendation has not been accepted by the Govt. of India, fearing a loss of popularity [ January 2011 ], and thus Indian Govt. continues with an unusually large number of religious holidays as compared to most other countries. [ Holidays in government offices ] Central &amp; State governments in India annually issue list of holidays to be observed in respective government offices during the respective year. { Holidays to be observed in central government offices during the year } List is divided into two parts: Gazetted holidays (Annexure I) Restricted holidays (Annexure II) Apart from this local administration at district level also issue list of additional holidays known as local holidays, which are observed at district level. [ Central government ] Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions (Department of Personnel and Training) on behalf of Government of India issues list of holidays to be observed in central government offices during the respective year. The list is divided in two parts i.e. Annexure I &amp; Annexure II. [ Annexure I ] Annexure I also known as Gazetted holidays, consists of list of holidays which are mandatory once decided. This list consists of two parts: Para 2 Para 3.1 [ Para 2 ] It consists of holidays which have to be observed compulsorily across India. These holidays are: { # Republic Day, } Independence Day, Mahatma Gandhi&apos;s Birthday, Budha Purnima Christmas Day Dussehra (Vijaya Dashami) Diwali (Deepavali) Good Friday Guru Nanak&apos;s Birthday Eid ul-Fitr Eid al-Adha (Bakrid) Mahavir Jayanti Muharram Prophet Mohammad&apos;s Birthday (Id-e-Milad) [ Para 3.1 ] In addition to the above 14 Compulsory holidays mentioned in para 2, three holidays are decided from the list indicated below by the Central Government Employees Welfare Coordination Committee in the State Capitals (if necessary, in consultation with Coordination Committees at other places in the State). The final list is applicable uniformly to all Central Government offices within the concerned State shall. they are notified after seeking prior approval of this Ministry and no change can be carried out thereafter. No change is permissible in regard to festivals and dates. { # An additional day for Dussehra } Holi Janamashtami (Vaishanvi) Ram Navami Maha Shivratri Ganesh Chaturthi / Vinayak Chaturthi Makar Sankrantili Rath Yatra Onam Sri Panchami / Basanta Panchami Vishu / Vaisakhi / Vaisakhadi / Bhag Bihu / Mashadi Ugadi / Chaitra Sakladi / Cheti Chand / Gudi Pada 1st Navratra / Nauraj [ Annexure II ] Annexure II also known as Restricted holidays, consists of list of holidays which are optional. Each employee is allowed to avail any two holidays to be chosen out of the list of Restricted Holidays. The Coordination Committees at the State Capitals draw up separate list of Restricted Holidays keeping in view the occasions of local importance but the 9 occasions left over, after choosing the 3 variable holidays in para 3.1, are to be included in the list of restricted holidays. [ Central government organisations ] Central Government Organisations which include industrial, commercial and trading establishments observe up to 16 holidays in a year including three national holidays viz. Republic Day, Independence Day and Mahatma Gandhi&apos;s birthday, as compulsory holidays. The remaining holidays / occasions may be determined by such establishments / organisations themselves, subject to para 3.2. [ Union territory administrations ] Union Territory Administrations decide the list of holidays in terms of Ministry of Home Affairs letter No.14046/27 /83- GP-I dated 15 February 1984 by which they observe a total of 16 holidays including the three National Holidays viz. Republic Day, Independence Day &amp; Mahatma Gandhi&apos;s birthday. [ Indian missions abroad ] In respect of Indian Missions abroad, the number of holidays are notified in accordance with the instructions contained in Department of Personnel and Training&apos;s O.M. No.12/5/2002-JCA dated 17 December 2002. In other words, they have the option to select 11(Eleven) holidays of their own only after including in the list, three National Holidays and Milad-Un-Nabi or Id-E-Milad, Mahavir Jayanti, Idu&apos;l Fitr, Dussehra (Vijaya Dashami), Guru Nanak&apos;s Birthday, Christmas Day included in the list of compulsory holidays and falling on days of weekly off. [ Banks ] [ Bank holidays in India ] In respect of Banks, the holidays are restricted to 15 days in a year in terms of the instructions issued by the Department of Economic Affairs (BankingDivision). Bank&apos;s Holiday Gandhi Jayanti Maharaja Agresen Jayanti Kashiram Death Anniversary Dussehra (Maha Navami) Dussehra (Vijaya Dashami) Deepawali Deepawali (Govardhan Puja) Bhai Duj/Chitragupt Jayanti Eid al-Adha (Bakrid) Guru Nanak&apos;s birthday/Kartik Poornima Dr. B R. Ambedkar&apos;s Nirwan Diwas Moharram Christmas [ Restricted holidays ] New Year&apos;s Day Guru Gobind Singh Ji Jayanti Makar Sankaranti Basanta Panchami Guru Ravidas Jayanti Chehalalum Holi Istar Satur-day Istar Mon-day Baishakhi Janmashtami Vishwakarma Pooja Eid ul fitr Anant chaturdasi Dussehra (Maha Ashtami) Maharshi Balmiki Jayanti Deepawali (Narak Chaturdasi) Eid ul Adha (bakrid) Guru Teg Bahadur Shahid Diwas Moharram Christmas Eve [ See also ] Bank holidays in India Indian New Year&apos;s days List of Hindu festivals [ References ] [ External links ] [ Holidays in India ] Public Holidays India 2012 Dates of Public Holidays in India List of Bank Holidays for the Year 2010 in India Ganga Dussehra 2012 [ Public holidays in ] * India Category:India-related lists as:ভাৰতৰ গুৰুত্বপূৰ্ণ দিৱসসমূহ bn:ভারতের জাতীয় দিবস fr:Fêtes en Inde lt:Indijos šventės hu:Indiai ünnepek mr:भारतीय सण आणि उत्सव ru:Праздники Индии