[ June 2010 ] [ Mesencephalon mesencephalon 188 800 Human brain inferior view description.JPG Inferior view mesencephalon (2), above (3) Human brainstem-thalamus posterior view description.JPG Human brainstem mesencephalon (B) hier 445 Mesencephalon A08.186.211.132.659 ] The midbrain or mesencephalon (from the Greek mesos - middle, and enkephalos - brain { Mosby’s Medical, Nursing and Allied Health Dictionary, Fourth Edition, Mosby-Year Book 1994, p. 981 } ) is a portion of the central nervous system associated with vision, hearing, motor control, sleep/wake, arousal (alertness), and temperature regulation. { Breedlove, Watson, &amp; Rosenzweig. Biological Psychology, 6th Edition, 2010, pp. 45-46 } Anatomically, it comprises the tectum (or corpora quadrigemina), tegmentum, the ventricular mesocoelia (or &quot; iter &quot; ), and the cerebral peduncle s, as well as several nuclei and fasciculi. Caudally the mesencephalon adjoins the pons ( metencephalon ) and rostrally it adjoins the diencephalon (Thalamus, hypothalamus, etc.). The midbrain is located below the cerebral cortex, and above the hindbrain placing it near the center of the brain. { http://www.morris.umn.edu/~ratliffj/images/brain_slides/slide_5.htm } [ Development ] During embryonic development, the midbrain arises from the second vesicle, also known as the mesencephalon, of the neural tube. Unlike the other two vesicles, the prosencephalon and rhombencephalon, the mesencephalon remains undivided for the remainder of neural development. It does not split into other brain areas. while the prosencephalon, for example, divides into the telencephalon and the diencephalon. { Martin. Neuroanatomy Text and Atlas, Second Edition, 1996, pp. 35-36. } Throughout embryonic development, the cells within the midbrain continually multiply and compress the still-forming Aqueduct of Sylvius or cerebral aqueduct. Partial or total obstruction of the cerebral aqueduct during development can lead to congenital hydrocephalus. [ http://www.ninds.nih.gov/disorders/hydrocephalus/detail_hydrocephalus.htm Hydrocephalus Fact Sheet National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke 2008-02 2011-03-23 ] [ Functional Role ] The mesencephalon is considered part of the brainstem. Its substantia nigra is closely associated with motor system pathways of the basal ganglia. The human mesencephalon is archipallian in origin, meaning its general architecture is shared with the most ancient of vertebrate s. Dopamine produced in the substantia nigra plays a role in motivation and habituation of species from humans to the most elementary animals such as insects. The midbrain is the smallest region in the brain and helps to relay information for vision and hearing. [ Corpora quadrigemina ] The corpora quadrigemina ( &quot; quadruplet bodies &quot; ) are four solid lobes on the dorsal side of the cerebral aqueduct, where the superior posterior pair are called the superior colliculi and the inferior posterior pair are called the inferior colliculi.The four solid lobes help to decussate several fibres of the optic nerve. However some fibers also show ipsilateral arrangement (i.e. they run parallel on the same side without decussating.)The superior colliculus is involved with saccadic eye movements; while the inferior is a synapsing point for sound information. The trochlear nerve comes out of the posterior surface of the midbrain, below the inferior colliculus. [ Cerebral peduncle ] The cerebral peduncles are paired structures, present on the ventral side of cerebral aqueduct, and they further carry tegmentum on the dorsal side and cresta or pes on the ventral side, and both of them accommodate the corticospinal tract fibres, from the internal capsule (i.e. ascending + descending tracts = longitudinal tract.)the middle part of cerebral peduncles carry substantia nigra (also called &quot; Black Matter &quot; ) which is a type of basal nucleus. It is the only part of the brain that carries melanin pigment. Between the peduncles is the interpeduncular fossa, which is a cistern filled with cerebrospinal fluid. The oculomotor nerve comes out between the peduncles, and the trochlear nerve is visible wrapping around the outside of the peduncles. The oculomotor is responsible for pupil constriction (parasympathetic) and eye movement. [ May 2010 ] [ Anatomical features of cross-sections through the midbrain ] right The midbrain is usually sectioned at the level of the superior and inferior colliculi. Mesencephalon of human embryo A transverse cross-section at the level of the superior colliculus shows the red nucleus, the nuclei of the oculomotor nerve (and associated Edinger-Westphal nucleus ), the superior cerebellar peduncles or crus cerebri, and the substantia nigra. Martin. Neuroanatomy Text and Atlas, Second edition. 1996, pp. 522-525. A horizontal cross section at the level of the inferior colluiculus still shows the substantia nigra. Also apparent are the trochlear nerve nucleus, and the decussation of the superior cerebellar peduncles. Martin. Neuroanatomy Text and Atlas, Second edition. 1996, pp. 522-525. Both sections will show the cerebral aqueduct, which connects the third and fourth ventricle and the periaqueductal gray. Martin. Neuroanatomy Text and Atlas, Second edition. 1996, pp. 522-525. One mnemonic for remembering the structures of the midbrain involves visualizing the mesencephalic cross-section as an upside down bear face. The two red nuclei are the eyes of the bear and the cerebral peduncles are the ears. [ Organization ] right inferior colliculi superior colliculi { cerebral peduncle } midbrain tegmentum crus cerebri substantia nigra [ See also ] list of regions in the human brain [ References ] ar:دماغ متوسط az:Orta beyin be:Сярэдні мозг ca:Mesencèfal cs:Střední mozek da:Mesencephalon de:Mittelhirn el:Μεσεγκέφαλος es:Mesencéfalo eu:Mesentzefalo fa:مغز میانی fr:Mésencéphale ko:중간뇌 hy:Միջին ուղեղ id:Otak tengah it:Mesencefalo he:המוח האמצעי jv:Utek tengah kk:Ортаңғы ми lt:Vidurinės smegenys hu:Középagy mk:Среден мозок nl:Mesencephalon ja:中脳 no:Mesencephalon pl:Śródmózgowie pt:Mesencéfalo ru:Средний мозг simple:Mesencephalon sk:Stredný mozog sh:Srednji mozak fi:Keskiaivot sv:Mitthjärnan th:สมองส่วนกลาง uk:Середній мозок ug:ئوتتۇرا مېڭە zh:中腦