The temple of Athena Nike after its recent anastylosis which integrated many original spare parts of the temple. The Temple of Athena Nike ( Greek : Ναός Αθηνάς Νίκης) is a temple on the Acropolis of Athens. Nike means victory in Greek, and Athena was worshiped in this form, as goddess of victory in war and wisdom. The temple is the earliest fully ionic temple on the Acropolis, compensated by its prominent position on a steep bastion at the south west corner of the Acropolis to the right of the entrance, the Propylaea. There the citizens worshipped the goddess in hope of a prosperous outcome in the long war fought on land and sea against the Sparta ns and their allies. The Temple of Athena Nike was an expression of Athens&apos; ambition to be the leading Greek city state. In contrast to the Acropolis proper, a walled sanctuary entered through the Propylaea, the Nike Sanctuary was open, entered from the Propylaea&apos;s southwest wing and from a narrow stair on the north. The sheer walls of its bastion were protected on the north, west, and south by a parapet, the famed Nike Parapet, named for its frieze of Nikai celebrating victory and sacrificing to their patroness, Athena. [ Temple architecture and sculpture ] Floor plan The Temple of Athena Nike was built between 427 and 424 BC, during the Peace of Nicias. It is a tetrastyle (four column ) Ionic structure with a colonnade d portico at both front and rear facade s ( amphiprostyle ), designed by the architect Kallikrates. This building was erected on top of the remains of an earlier 6th century BC temple to Athena, demolished by the Persians in 480  BC. The total height from the stylobate to the acme of the pediment while the temple remained intact was a modest 23 feet. The ratio of height to diameter of the columns is 7:1, the slender proportions creating an elegance and refinement not encountered in the normal 9:1 or 10:1 of Ionic buildings. Constructed from white pentelic marble, it was built in stages as war-starved funding allowed. { Acropolis Museum. } A statue of Nike stood in the cella, or otherwise referred to as a naos. Nike was originally the &quot; winged victory &quot; goddess (see the winged Nike of Samothrace ) The Athena Nike statue&apos;s absence of wings led Athenians in later centuries to call it Nike Apteros (wingless victory), and the story arose that the statue was deprived of wings so that it could never leave the city. The frieze s of the building&apos;s entablature were decorated on all sides with relief sculpture in the idealized classical style of the 5th century BC. The north frieze depicted a battle between Greeks entailing cavalry. The south frieze showed the decisive victory over the Persians at the battle of Plataea. The east frieze showed an assembly of the gods Athena, Zeus and Poseidon, rendering Athenian religious beliefs and reverence for the gods bound up in the social and political climate of 5th Century Athens. Some time after the temple was completed, around 410  BC a parapet was added around it to prevent people from falling from the steep bastion. The outside of the parapet was adorned by exquisitely carved relief sculptures showing Nike in a variety of activities, the best-known Olympian. Temple of Athena Nike After three separate restorations the small Temple of Athena Nike/Apteros still stands on the Acropolis, together with the Erechtheum and the Parthenon, a survivor of antiquity. The main structure, stylobate and columns are largely intact, minus the roof and most of the tympanae. Fragments of the sculpted frieze are exhibited in the Acropolis Museum and the British Museum; copies of these are fixed in their place on the temple. [ See also ] Architecture of Ancient Greece Art of Ancient Greece Classical architecture Classical sculpture [ References ] Greek architecture Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1968. Greece: From Mycenae to the Parthenon, Henri Stierlin, TASCHEN, 2004. [ External links ] [ Temple of Athena Nike in Athens ] Dr. J&apos;s Illustrated Temple of Athena Nike Temple of Athena Nike Frieze Pictures Digital reconstruction drawings of the Temple of Athena Nike Category:5th-century BC architecture Category:Temples in ancient Athens Category:Ancient Greek buildings and structures in Athens Category:Acropolis of Athens Nike ca:Temple de Nike Àptera de:Tempel der Athena Nike el:Ναός Αθηνάς Νίκης es:Templo de Atenea Niké eo:Templo de Atena Nike fr:Temple d&apos;Athéna Nikè gl:Templo de Atenea Nike ko:아테나 니케의 신전 hr:Hram Atene Nike is:Hof Aþenu Nike it:Tempio di Atena Nike (Atene) nl:Nikètempel ja:アテーナー・ニーケー神殿 pl:Świątynia Ateny Nike pt:Templo de Atena Nice ro:Templul Atenei Nike ru:Храм Ники Аптерос sk:Chrám Atény Niké sh:Hram Atene Nike sv:Athena Niketemplet tr:Athena-Nike Tapınağı uk:Храм Ніки Аптерос vi:Đền Athena Nike