[ Moore, R.T. Taxonomic proposals for the classification of marine yeasts and other yeast-like fungi including the smuts 1980 Botanica Marina 23 371 ] { Subphyla/Classes } { Agaricomycotina } { Pucciniomycotina } { Ustilaginomycotina } { Incertae sedis (no subphyla) : } { Wallemiomycetes } Basidiomycota ( [ icon b ə ˌ s ɪ d i. ɵ m aɪ ˈ k oʊ t ə ] ) is one of two large phyla that, together with the Ascomycota, comprise the subkingdom Dikarya (often referred to as the &quot; higher fungi &quot; ) within the kingdom Fungi. More specifically the Basidiomycota include these groups: mushroom s, puffball s, stinkhorn s, bracket fungi, other polypore s, jelly fungi, bolete s, chanterelles, earth stars, smuts, bunts, rusts, mirror yeast s, and the human pathogenic yeast Cryptococcus. Basically, Basidiomycota are filamentous fungi composed of hypha e (except for yeasts), and reproducing sexually via the formation of specialized club-shaped end cell s called basidia that normally bear external meiospore s (usually four). These specialized spore s are called basidiospore s. However, some Basidiomycota reproduce asexually in addition or exclusively. Basidiomycota that reproduce asexually (discussed below) can be recognized as members of this phylum by gross similarity to others, by the formation of a distinctive anatomical feature (the clamp connection - see below), cell wall components, and definitively by phylogenetic molecular analysis of DNA sequence data. [ Classification ] The most recent classification [ Hibbett, D.S., et al. 2007 A higher level phylogenetic classification of the Fungi Mycological Research 111 5 509–47 10.1016/j.mycres.2007.03.004 17572334 ] adopted by a coalition of 67 mycologist s recognizes three subphyla ( Pucciniomycotina, Ustilaginomycotina, Agaricomycotina ) and two other class level taxa ( Wallemiomycetes, Entorrhizomycetes ) outside of these, among the Basidiomycota. As now classified, the subphyla join and also cut across various obsolete taxonomic groups (see below) previously commonly used to describe Basidiomycota. According to a 2008 estimate, Basidiomycota comprise three subphyla (including six unassigned classes) 16 classes, 52 orders, 177 families, 1,589 genera, and 31,515 species. { Kirk, P.M., P.F. Cannon &amp; J.A. Stalpers 2008. Dictionary of the Fungi, 10th ed., CABI. pp. 78–79. } Traditionally, the Basidiomycota were divided into two classes, now obsolete: Homobasidiomycetes, including true mushroom s Heterobasidiomycetes, including the jelly, rust and smut fungi Previously the entire Basidiomycota were called Basidiomycetes, an invalid class level name coined in 1959 as a counterpart to the Ascomycetes, when neither of these taxa were recognized as phyla. The terms basidiomycetes and ascomycetes are frequently used loosely to refer to Basidiomycota and Ascomycota. They are often abbreviated to &quot; basidios &quot; and &quot; ascos &quot; as mycological slang. [ April 2011 ] [ Agaricomycotina ] The Agaricomycotina include what had previously been called the Hymenomycetes (an obsolete morphological based class of Basidiomycota that formed hymenial layers on their fruitbodies ), the Gasteromycetes (another obsolete class that included species mostly lacking hymenia and mostly forming spores in enclosed fruitbodies ), as well as most of the jelly fungi. The three classes in the Agaricomycotina are the Agaricomycetes, the Dacrymycetes, and the Tremellomycetes. { Kirk, P.M., P.F. Cannon &amp; J.A. Stalpers 2008. Dictionary of the Fungi, 10th ed., CABI. p. 13. } [ Pucciniomycotina ] The Pucciniomycotina includes the rust fungi, the insect parasitic/symbiotic genus Septobasidium, a former group of smut fungi (in the Microbotryomycetes, which includes mirror yeasts), and a mixture of odd, infrequently seen or seldom recognized fungi, often parasitic on plants. The eight classes in the Pucciniomycotina are Agaricostilbomycetes, Atractiellomycetes, Classiculomycetes, Cryptomycocolacomycetes, Cystobasidiomycetes, Microbotryomycetes, Mixiomycetes, and Pucciniomycetes. { Kirk, P.M., P.F. Cannon &amp; J.A. Stalpers 2008. Dictionary of the Fungi, 10th ed., CABI. p. 581. } [ Ustilaginomycotina ] The Ustilaginomycotina are most (but not all) of the former smut fungi and along with the Exobasidiales. The classes of the Ustilaginomycotina are the Exobasidiomycetes, the Entorrhizomycetes, and the Ustilaginomycetes. { Kirk, P.M., P.F. Cannon &amp; J.A. Stalpers 2008. Dictionary of the Fungi, 10th ed., CABI. pp. 717–18. } The class Wallemiomycetes is not yet placed in a subphylum. [ Typical life-cycle ] Unlike higher animals and plants which have readily recognizable male and female counterparts, Basidiomycota (except for the Rust ( Pucciniales )) tend to have mutually indistinguishable, compatible haploid s which are usually mycelia being composed of filamentous hyphae. Typically haploid Basidiomycota mycelia fuse via plasmogamy and then the compatible nuclei migrate into each other&apos;s mycelia and pair up with the resident nuclei. Karyogamy is delayed, so that the compatible nuclei remain in pairs, called a dikaryon. The hyphae are then said to be dikaryotic. Conversely, the haploid mycelia are called monokaryon s. Often, the dikaryotic mycelium is more vigorous than the individual monokaryotic mycelia, and proceeds to take over the substrate in which they are growing. The dikaryons can be long-lived, lasting years, decades, or centuries. The monokaryons are neither male nor female. They have either a bipolar (unifactorial) or a tetrapolar (bifactorial) mating system. This results in the fact that following meiosis, the resulting haploid basidiospore s and resultant monokaryons, have nuclei that are compatible with 50% (if bipolar) or 25% (if tetrapolar) of their sister basidiospores (and their resultant monokaryons) because the mating genes must differ for them to be compatible. However, there are many variations of these genes in the population, and therefore, over 90% of monokaryons are compatible with each other. It is as if there were multiple sexes. The maintenance of the dikaryotic status in dikaryons in many Basidiomycota is facilitated by the formation of clamp connection s that physically appear to help coordinate and re-establish pairs of compatible nuclei following synchronous mitotic nuclear divisions. Variations are frequent and multiple. In a typical Basidiomycota lifecycle the long lasting dikaryons periodically (seasonally or occasionally) produce basidia, the specialized usually club-shaped end cells, in which a pair of compatible nuclei fuse ( karyogamy ) to form a diploid cell. Meiosis follows shortly with the production of 4 haploid nuclei that migrate into 4 external, usually apical basidiospore s. Variations occur, however. Typically the basidiospores are ballistic, hence they are sometimes also called ballistospore s. In most species, the basidiospores disperse and each can start a new haploid mycelium, continuing the lifecycle. Basidia are microscopic but they are often produced on or in multicelled large fructifications called basidiocarp s or basidiomes, or fruitbodies ), variously called mushroom s, puffball s, etc. Ballistic basidiospores are formed on sterigmata which are tapered spine-like projections on basidia, and are typically curved, like the horns of a bull. In some Basidiomycota the spores are not ballistic, and the sterigmata may be straight, reduced to stubbs, or absent. The basidiospores of these non-ballistosporic basidia may either bud off, or be released via dissolution or disintegration of the basidia. { hymenium and basidia. } In summary, meiosis takes place in a diploid basidium. Each one of the four haploid nuclei migrates into its own basidiospore. The basidiospores are ballistically discharged and start new haploid mycelia called monokaryons. There are no males or females, rather there are compatible thalli with multiple compatibility factors. Plasmogamy between compatible individuals leads to delayed karyogamy leading to establishment of a dikaryon. The dikaryon is long lasting but ultimately gives rise to either fruitbodies with basidia or directly to basidia without fruitbodies. The paired dikaryon in the basidium fuse (i.e. karyogamy takes place). The diploid basidium begins the cycle again. [ Variations in life-cycles ] Many variations occur. Some are self compatible and spontaneously form dikaryons without a separate compatible thallus being involved. These fungi are said to be homothallic, versus the normal heterothallic species with mating types. Others are secondarily homothallic, in that two compatible nuclei following meiosis migrate into each basidiospore, which is then dispersed as a pre-existing dikaryon. Often such species form only two spores per basidium, but that too varies. Following meiosis, mitotic divisions can occur in the basidium. Multiple numbers of basidiospores can result, including odd numbers via degeneration of nuclei, or pairing up of nuclei, or lack of migration of nuclei. For example, the chanterelle genus Craterellus often has 6-spored basidia, while some corticioid Sistotrema species can have 2-, 4-, 6-, or 8-spored basidia, and the cultivated button mushroom, Agaricus bisporus. can have 1-, 2-, 3- or 4-spored basidia under some circumstances. Occasionally monokaryons of some taxa can form morphologically fully formed basidiomes and anatomically correct basidia and ballistic basidiospores in the absence of dikaryon formation, diploid nuclei, and meiosis. A rare few number of taxa have extended diploid life-cycles, but can be common species. Examples exist in the mushroom genera Armillaria and Xerula, both in the Physalacriaceae. Occasionally basidiospores are not formed and parts of the &quot; basidia &quot; act as the dispersal agents, e.g. the peculiar mycoparasitic jelly fungus, Tetragoniomyces or the entire &quot; basidium &quot; acts as a &quot; spore &quot;, e.g. in some false puffballs ( Scleroderma ). In the human pathogenic genus Cryptococcus, 4 nuclei following meiosis remain in the basidium but continually divide mitotically, each nucleus migrating into synchronously forming nonballistic basidiospores that are then pushed upwards by another set forming below them, resulting in 4 parallel chains of dry &quot; basidiospores &quot;. Other variations occur, some as standard life-cycles (that themselves have variations within variations) within specific orders. [ Rusts ] Rusts ( Pucciniales, previously known as Uredinales ) at their greatest complexity produce five different types of spores on two different hosts in two unrelated host families. Such rusts are heteroecious (requiring 2 hosts) and macrocyclic (producing all 5 spores types). Wheat stem rust is an example. By convention the stages and spore states are numbered by Roman numerals. Typically, basidiospores infect host one, also known as the alternate or sexual host, the mycelium forms pycnidia, which are miniature, flask-shaped, hollow, submicroscopic bodies embedded in host tissue (such as a leaf). This stage, numbered &quot; 0 &quot;, produces single-celled spores that ooze out in a sweet liquid and that act as nonmotile spermatia, and also protruding receptive hyphae. Insect s and probably other vector s such as rain carry the spermatia from spermagonia to spermagonia, cross inoculating the mating types. Neither thallus is male or female. Once crossed, the dikaryons are established and a second spore stage is formed, numbered &quot; I &quot; and called aecia, which form dikaryotic aeciospore s in dry chains in inverted cup-shaped bodies embedded in host tissue. These aeciospores then infect the second host, known as the primary or asexual host (in macrocyclic rusts). On the primary host a repeating spore stage is formed, numbered &quot; II &quot;, the urediospore s in dry pustules called uredinia. Urediospores are dikaryotic and can infect the same host that produced them. They repeatedly infect this host over the growing season. At the end of the season, a fourth spore type, the teliospore, is formed. It is thicker-walled and serves to overwinter or to survive other harsh conditions. It does not continue the infection process, rather it remains dormant for a period and then germinates to form basidia (stage &quot; IV &quot; ), sometimes called a promycelium. In the Pucciniales, the basidia are cylindrical and become 3- septate after meiosis, with each of the 4 cells bearing one basidiospore each. The basidospores disperse and start the infection process on host 1 again. Autoecious rusts complete their life-cycles on one host instead of two, and microcyclic rusts cut out one or more stages. [ Smuts ] The characteristic part of the life-cycle of smuts is the thick-walled, often darkly pigmented, ornate, teliospore that serves to survive harsh conditions such as overwintering and also serves to help disperse the fungus as dry diaspore s. The teliospores are initially dikaryotic but become diploid via karyogamy. Meiosis takes place at the time of germination. A promycelium is formed that consists of a short hypha (equated to a basidium). In some smuts such as Ustilago maydis the nuclei migrate into the promycelium that becomes septa te, and haploid yeast-like conidia/basidiospores sometimes called sporidia, bud off laterally from each cell. In various smuts, the yeast phase may proliferate, or they may fuse, or they may infect plant tissue and become hyphal. In other smuts, such as Tilletia caries, the elongated haploid basidiospores form apically, often in compatible pairs that fuse centrally resulting in &quot; H &quot; -shaped diaspore s which are by then dikaryotic. Dikaryotic conidia may then form. Eventually the host is infected by infectious hyphae. Teliospores form in host tissue. Many variations on these general themes occur. Smuts with both a yeast phase and an infectious hyphal state are examples of dimorphic Basidiomycota. In plant parasitic taxa, the saprotrophic phase is normally the yeast while the infectious stage is hyphal. However, there are examples of animal and human parasites where the species are dimorphic but it is the yeast-like state that is infectious. The genus Filobasidiella forms basidia on hyphae but the main infectious stage is more commonly known by the anamorph ic yeast name Cryptococcus, e.g. Cryptococcus neoformans and Cryptococcus gattii. The dimorphic Basidiomycota with yeast stages and the pleiomorphic rusts are examples of fungi with anamorph s, which are the asexual stages. Some Basidiomycota are only known as anamorphs. Many are yeasts, collectively called basidiomycetous yeasts to differentiate them from ascomycetous yeasts in the Ascomycota. Aside from yeast anamorphs, and uredinia, aecia and pycnidia, some Basidiomycota form other distinctive anamorphs as parts of their life-cycles. Examples are Collybia tuberosa { http://www.bio.utk.edu/mycology/ATBI/Photos/12000to12099/12074.jpg } with its apple-seed-shaped and coloured sclerotium, Dendrocollybia racemosa { Microsoft Word - Machnicki revised for pdf final august 24 } with its sclerotium and its Tilachlidiopsis racemosa conidia, Armillaria with their rhizomorphs, { LUXGENE.COM: the glow-in-the-dark website } Hohenbuehelia { Hohenbue } with their Nematoctonus nematode infectious, state { 8knobs } and the coffee leaf parasite, Mycena citricolor and its Decapitatus flavidus propagule s called gemmae. [ See also ] [ Basidiomycota ] [ Basidiomycota ] List of Basidiomycota families [ References ] [ External links ] Basidiomycota at the Tree of Life Web Project ar:دعاميات an:Basidiomycota be:Базідыямікота bg:Базидиеви гъби ca:Basidiomicet cs:Stopkovýtrusné houby da:Basidiesvampe de:Basidienpilze et:Kandseened es:Basidiomycota eo:Bazidiomicetoj eu:Basidiomycota fr:Basidiomycota ko:담자균류 id:Basidiomycota is:Kólfsveppir it:Basidiomycota he:פטריות בסיסה jv:Basidiomycota ka:ბაზიდიუმიანი სოკოები kk:Базидиомицеттер lv:Bazīdijsēnes lt:Papėdgrybiai hu:Bazídiumos gombák mk:Столпчести габи nl:Basidiomycota ja:担子菌門 no:Stilksporesopper pl:Podstawczaki pt:Basidiomycota ro:Basidiomycota qu:Tiksicha k&apos;allampa ru:Базидиомицеты simple:Basidiomycota sk:Bazídiové huby fi:Kantasienet sv:Basidiesvampar tl:Basidiomycota te:బెసిడియోమైకోటా tr:Bazitli mantarlar uk:Базидіомікотові wa:Bassidiomicete zh:担子菌门