[ Avranches Avranchesjardindesplantes.JPG Botanical garden Basse-Normandie Manche Blason ville fr Avranches (Manche).svg Avranches Avranches 50025 50300 Guenaël Huet 2001 –2008 -1.3556 48.685 108 7 108 4.5 8500 1999 ] Avranches is a commune in the Manche department in the Basse-Normandie region in north-western France. It is a sub-prefecture of the department. The inhabitants are called Avranchinais. { Rene Andre, Avranches 2000 ans d&apos; histoire, Publication Municipale } [ History ] By the end of the Roman period, the settlement of Ingena, capital of the Abrincatui tribe, had taken the name of the tribe itself. This was the origin of the name Avranches. In 511 the town became the seat of a bishopric (suppressed in 1790). In 933 Avranches and its territory, the Avranchin, were ceded to the Normans. In 1172 (September 27–28) a council was held at Avranches apropos of the troubles caused in the English Church by the murder of the Anglo-Norman saint Thomas Becket. Henry II, King of England, after due penance done in Avranches on 21 May 1172, was absolved from the censures incurred by the assassination of the holy prelate, and reached the Compromise of Avranches with the Church, swearing fidelity to Pope Alexander III in the person of the papal legate. Patton Square It was forbidden by the same council to confer on children benefice carrying with it the cure of souls, or on the children of priests the churches of their fathers. Each parish was required to have an assistant (vicarius) and the Advent fast was commended to all who could observe it, especially to ecclesiastics. The town was damaged in both the Hundred Years War and the Wars of Religion. Álvaro Vaz de Almada was made 1st Count of Avranches by King Henry VI of England. A literal description of the town in the 19th century is recorded in Guy de Maupassant &apos;s novel Notre Cœur where the main character Mariolle meets his lover and sets up for Mont Saint Michel : The houses crowning the heights gave to the place from a distance the appearance of a fortification. Seen close at hand it was an ancient and pretty Norman city, with small dwellings of regular and almost similar appearance built closely adjoining one another, giving an aspect of ancient pride and modern comfort, a feudal yet peasant-like air. The Avranches breakthrough in World War II began on 31 July 1944, and was led by General George S. Patton. [ Geography ] Avranches is situated at the southern end of the Cotentin Peninsula on the E40 road connecting Saint-Lô with Brittany and on the rail line between Lison (linking to Caen) and Dol (linking to Rennes). The town was founded on high ground overlooking the dunes and coastal marshes along the bay forming the corner between the peninsulas of the Cotentin and Brittany. From Avranches, it is possible to see the Mont Saint Michel, which was founded by Saint Aubert, Bishop of Avranches in the 8th century. [ Main sights ] Notre Dame des Champs A museum houses the collection of manuscripts of Mont Saint Michel, deposited in the municipal archives during the French Revolution. It is one of the largest collections of medieval illuminated manuscripts in France, outside national and university libraries. Formerly dominated by the cathedral, where Henry II did penance, an open grassed area La Plate-Forme overlooking the bay towards Mont Saint Michel displays only a few remnants of the destroyed building. The major church Notre Dame des Champs was constructed in Gothic Revival style in the 19th century to restore the religious life of the town after the destruction of the cathedral. A smaller church Saint Gervais houses a treasury, best known for the purported skull of Saint Aubert complete with hole where the archangel Michael&apos;s finger pierced it (probably a prehistoric trepanned skull). The botanical gardens were founded in the grounds of the former Franciscan convent in the late 18th century. The expansion and introduction of exotic species in the 19th century and the location of the gardens overlooking the bay made the gardens an important sight in the town. The Manoir de Brion, an ancient Benedictine priory of Mont Saint Michel, is located in Dragey. Avranches is twinned with St. Helier in Jersey. On 2 March 2010 a Jersey-registered boat &quot; Archangel &quot; succeeded in reaching Avranches at Marcey-les-Greves. It is believed this was the first instance of a foreign vessel reaching Avranches in modern times. { A video of this voyage can be seen here: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=w_JcTw7IMF4 } Notre-Dame-des-Champs, Stations of the Cross Saint-Gervais Basilica Saint-Gervais Basilica, Skull of Saint Aubert [ Twin towns ] [ France ] [ Germany ] [ UK ] [ UK ] Saint-Gaudens, France, since the autumn of 1944, when the town of Saint-Gaudens fraternally assisted Avranches by addressing clothing and food to it. Korbach, Germany, since 1963 Saint-Hélier, United Kingdom, since 1982 Crediton, United Kingdom, since 1993 [ Births ] [ Normandy ] Avranches was the birthplace of: General Jean-Marie Valhubert, (1764–1805) Paul-Armand Challemel-Lacour, (1827–1896), statesman Jean-Luc Ponty (born 1942), violin ist and jazz composer Samuel Le Bihan (born 1965), a movie actor. Hamon de Massey, Norman lord in the barony of Chester. [ References ] [ Avranches ] [ Avranches ] [ Council of Avranches ] INSEE commune file Category:Communes of Manche Category:Subprefectures in France af:Avranches br:Avranches ca:Avranches ceb:Avranches da:Avranches de:Avranches el:Αβράνς es:Avranches eo:Avranches eu:Avranches fr:Avranches gl:Avranches it:Avranches la:Avrincae ms:Avranches nl:Avranches ja:アヴランシュ nn:Avranches oc:Avranches pl:Avranches pt:Avranches ro:Avranches ru:Авранш sk:Avranches sl:Avranches sr:Авранш sv:Avranches bug:Avranches uk:Авранш vi:Avranches vo:Avranches war:Avranches zh:阿夫朗什