[ August 2011 ] { Appledore II &apos;&apos; under construction } Boat building, one of the oldest branches of engineering, is concerned with constructing the hulls of boat s and, for sailboat s, the mast s, spar s and rigging. [ Parts ] { Greece } Side view of the wooden frame Bow - the front and generally sharp end of the hull. It is designed to reduce the resistance of the hull cutting through water and should be tall enough to prevent water from easily washing over the top of the hull. Bulkhead - the internal walls of the hull Chines - are long, longitudinal strips on hydroplaning hulls that deflect downwards the spray that is produced by the hull when it travels at speed in the water. The term also refers to distinct changes in angle of the hull sections, where the bottom blends into the top sides of a flat, v or arc bottomed boat such as a skiff, for instance. A multi chine hull has 4 or more chines to allow an approximation of a round bottomed shape using flat panels. It also refers to the longitudinal members inside the hull which support the edges of these panels. Deck - the top surface of the hull keeps water and weather out of the hull and allows the crew to operate the boat more easily. It stiffens an enclosed hull. Frame A permanent or temporary frame work of wood or other material that fits across the hull to give the boat its distinct shape. In lightweight boats all the frames are removed and kept for another boat. These frames are called moulds. Garboard - the strake immediately adjacent to the keel in a traditional wooden boat. Gunwale - The upper, outside longitudinal structural member of the hull. Inwhale -The upper, inner longitudinal structural member of the hull, to which topside panels are fixed. Keel - the main central member along the length of the bottom of the boat. It is an important part of the boat&apos;s structure which also has a strong influence on its turning performance and, in sailing boats, resists the sideways pressure of the wind Keelson - an internal beam fixed to the top of the keel to strengthen the joint of the upper members of the boat to the keel Rudder - a steering device usually at the rear of the hull created by a turnable blade on a vertical axis Sheer - the generally curved shape of the top of the hull when viewed in profile. The sheer is traditionally lowest amidships to maximize freeboard at the ends of the hull. Sheers can be reverse, higher in the middle, to maximize space inside or straight or a combination of shapes. Stem - a continuation of the keel upwards at the front of the hull Stern - the back of the boat Strake - a strip of material running longitudinally along the vessel&apos;s side, bilge or bottom Transom - a wide, flat or slightly curved, sometimes vertical board at the rear of the hull, which, on small power boats, is often designed to carry an outboard motor. Transoms increase width and also buoyancy at the stern. On outboard boats the stern is often the widest point to provide displacemewnt to carry a large outbaoard and to resist the initial downward thrust of a planning craft. Sometimes the term tuck is used in a sail boat. [ Construction materials and methods ] [ section October 2007 ] Damaged boat mid-reconstruction; carvel planking partially removed Caulking irons and oakum Caulking a wooden boat Some types of wood construction include: Carvel, in which a smooth hull is formed by wooden planks attached to a frame. The planks may be curved in cross section like barrel staves. Carvel planks are generally caulked with oakum or cotton that is driven into the seams between the planks and covered with some waterproof substance. It takes its name from an archaic ship type and is believed to have originated in the Mediterranean. A number of boat building texts are available which describe the carvel planking method in detail. Carvel Planking for Boats, Sailboats - Richard Joyce Montana Tech Another method of building wooden boats is clinker, a technique originally identified with the Viking s in which wood en planks are fixed to each other with a slight overlap that is bevelled for a tight fit. The planks may be mechanically connected to each other with copper rivets, bent over iron nails, screws or with adhesives. Often, steam bent wooden frames are fitted inside the hull. Strip planking is yet another type of wooden boat construction. Strip Planking It is a glued construction method which is very popular with amateur boatbuilders as it is quick, avoids complex temporary jig work and does not require shaping of the planks. Planking Methods Comparison Another method is called sheet plywood boat building and uses sheets of plywood panel s usually fixed to a frame. Plywood may be laminated into a round hull or used in single sheets. These hulls generally have one or more chines and the method is called Ply on Frame construction. Ply on Frame construction A subdivision of the sheet plywood boat building method is known as the stitch-and-glue method, Stitch and glue subdivision of sheet plywood method where pre-shaped panels of plywood are edge glued and reinforced with fibreglass without the use of a frame. Benefits of stitch and glue Metal or plastic wires pull curved flat panels into three-dimensional curved shapes. These hulls generally have one or more chines. Plywood panels of good quality are often designated &quot; WBP &quot; (which stands for water- and boiled-proof) or BS 1088. Both types of plywood construction are very popular with amateur builders, and many dinghies such as the Vaurien, Cherub, Moth and P class (ply on frame construction) and FJs, FDs and Kolibri s (stitch-and-glue method) have been built from it. European Dinghies build by amateur builders Vaurien amateur building Another variation is tortured ply where very thin(3mm) and flexible (often Okoume)preshaped panels ply are bent into compound curves and sewn together. Little or no framework or longitudinal wood is used. This method is mainly confined to kayaks. Cold-Molding is a composite method of wooden boat building that uses 2 or more layers of thin wood, called veneers, oriented in different directions, resulting in a strong monoque structure, similar to a fibreglass hull but substacially lighter. Usually composed of a base layer of strip planking followed by multiple veneers, cold-molding is popular in small, medium and very large, wooden superyachts. Using different types of wood the builder can lighten some areas such as bow and stern and strengthen other high stresss areas. Sometimes cold moulded hulls are protected either inside or out or both with fibreglass or similar products for impact resistance especially when lightweight, soft timber such as cedar is used. This method lends itself to great flexibility in hull shape. Steel (and before that iron ) - Either used in sheet or alternatively, plate Welding, hot-riveting or drilling of plates for all-metal hulls or for isolated structural members. It is strong, but heavy (despite the fact that the thickness of the hull can be less). It is generally about 30% heavier than aluminium and somewhat more heavy than polyester. The material rusts unless protected from water (this is usually done by means of a covering of paint). Modern steel components are welded or bolt ed together. As the welding can be done very easily (with common welding equipment), and as the material is very cheap, it is a popular material with amateur builders. Also, amateur builders which are not yet well established in building steel ships may opt for DIY construction kits. If steel is used, a zinc layer is often applied to coat the entire hull. It is applied after sandblasting (which is required to have a cleaned surface) and before painting. The painting is usually done with lead paint (Pb 3 O 4 ). Optionally, the covering with the zinc layer may be left out, but it is generally not recommended. Zinc anode s also need to be placed on the ship&apos;s hull. Until the mid 1900s, steel sheets were rivet ed together. { punt under construction } { Klondike Gold Rush } Aluminium - either used in sheet for all-metal hulls or for isolated structural members. Many sailing spars are frequently made of aluminium after 1960. The material requires special manufacturing techniques, construction tools and construction skills. It is the lightest material for building boats (being 15-20% lighter than polyester and 30% lighter than steel). Aluminium is very expensive in most countries and it is usually not used by amateur builders. While it is easy to cut, aluminium is difficult to weld, and also requires heat treatments such as precipitation strengthening for most applications. Corrosion is a concern with aluminium, particularly below the waterline. It is most commonly used in small pleasure and fishing power boats that are not kept permanently in the water. Fiberglass ( Glass-reinforced plastic or GRP) - Typically used for production boats because of its ability to reuse a female mold as the foundation for the shape of the boat. The resulting structure is strong in tension but often needs to be either laid up with many heavy layers of resin-saturated fiberglass or reinforced with wood or foam in order to provide stiffness. GRP hulls are largely free of corrosion though not normally fireproof. These can be solid fiberglass or of the sandwich (cored) type, in which a core of balsa, foam or similar material is applied after the outer layer of fiberglass is laid to the mold, but before the inner skin is laid. This is similar to the next type, composite, but is not usually classified as composite, since the core material in this case does not provide much additional strength. It does, however, increase stiffness, which means that less resin and fiberglass cloth can be used in order to save weight. Most fibreglass boats are currently made in an open mold, with fibreglass and resin applied by hand ( hand-lay-up method). Some are now constructed by vacuum infusion where the fibres are laid out and resin is pulled into the mold by atmospheric pressure. This can produce stronger parts with more glass and less resin, but takes special materials and more technical knowledge. Older fibreglass boats befre 1990 were often not constructed in controlled temperature buildings leading to the widespread problem of fibreglass pox, where seawater seeped through small holes and caused delamination. The name comes from the multiude of surface pits in the outer gelcoat layer which resembles small pox. Sometimes the problem was caused by atmospheric moisture being trapped in the layup during construction in humid weather. Composite - Originally &quot; composite &quot; referred to a timber carvel skin fastened to iron frame and deck beams. This allowed sheet copper anti-fouling to be employed without the risk of galvanic corrosion of the hull fabric. It was employed for fast cargo vessels so that they were not slowed by marine fouling. This use is now obselete. While GRP, wood, and even concrete hulls are technically made of composite materials, the term &quot; composite &quot; is often used for plastics reinforced with fibers other than (or in addition to) glass. Cold-molded refers to a type of building one-off hulls using thin strips of wood applied to a series of forms at 45-degree angles to the centerline. This method is often called double-diagonal because a minimum of two layers is recommended, each occurring at opposing 45-degree angles. &quot; Cold-molding &quot; is now a relatively archaic term because the contrasting &quot; hot-molded &quot; method of building boats, which used ovens to heat and cure the resin, has not been widely used since World War II. Now almost all curing is done at room temperature. Other composite types include sheathed-strip, which uses (usually) a single layer of strips laid up parallel to the sheer line. The composite materials are then applied to the mold in the form of a thermosetting plastic (usually epoxy, polyester, or vinylester) and some kind of fiber cloth ( fiberglass, kevlar, dynel, carbon fiber, etc.), hence the finished hull is a &quot; composite &quot; of fiber and resin. These methods often give strength-to-weight ratios approaching that of aluminum, while requiring less specialized tools and skills. Steel-reinforced cement ( ferrocement ) - Strong and long lasting. First developed in the mid 19th Century in France. Used for building warships during the war. Extensively refined in New Zealand shipyards in the 1950s and the material became popular among amateur builders of cruising sailboats in the 1970s and 1980s, because the material cost was cheap although the labour time element was high. The weight of a finished ferrocement boat is much higher then most wooden boats. As such they are often built for slower, more comfortable sea passages. Hulls built properly of ferrocement are more labor-intensive than steel or fiberglass, so there are few examples of commercial shipyards using this material. The inability to mass produce boats in ferrocement has led there to there being few examples around. Many ferrocement boats built in back yards can have a rough, lumpy look, which has helped to give the material a poor reputation. The ferrocement method is easy to do, but it is also easy to do wrong. This has led to some disastrous &apos;home-built&apos; boats. Properly designed, built and plastered ferrocement boats have smooth hulls with fine lines. Most ferrocement hulls are designed from the start as heavy displacement. See also concrete ship, concrete canoe. [ Hull types ] [ Hull (watercraft) ] To build a boat, the type of hull used is of vital importance; for example, going to sea requires a hull which is more stable than a hull used for sailing rivers (which can be more flat/round). Some types include: Smooth curve hull - As its name implies, the hulls of these vessels are rounded and don&apos;t usually have any chines or corners. Chined and hard chined hulls - These are hulls made up of flat panels (commonly made of plywood, or more traditionally with planking) which meet at a sharp angle known as the chine. Chined hulls range from simple flat-bottomed boats where the topsides and bottom meet at about 110gdrees (such as banks dories and sharpie. In a skiff the bottom is arced rather than flat. Multichine plywood hulls allow a round hull shape to be approximated. Flat-bottomed hull - The flat-bottomed hull has advantages, such as the ability to travel in shallower water and being cheap and easy to build, though it is much less stable in rough waters than other hull types. Displacement hulls - These are hulls which have a shape which does not promote planing. Displacement hulls are often heavy and lack sufficient power -either motor or sail to achieve planning. They travel through the water at a limited rate which is defined by the waterline length. Planing hulls - These are hulls with a shape that allows the boat to rise higher and higher out of the water as the speed increases. They are commonly fine bowed. Sail boats that plane are flat-bottomed aft. Because sail boats sail healed the falt surface can be achieved with v or arc bottom shapes. Hydroplanes are very light, flat bottomed, high powered speed boats that plane easily on flat water but quickly become unstable in any waves. Powerboats designed for rough water are usually deep V-bottomed with a deadline angle of about 20-23 degrees. The most common form is to have at least one chine to allow for stability when cornering and for a supportive surface on which to ride while planing. Planing hulls allow much higher speeds to be achieved, and are not limited by the waterline length the way displacement hulls are. They require more energy in the form of large sails or high power motors plus light weight to achieve these speeds. [ Gallery ] Traditional boat building in India Sulkha shipyard Traditional wooden boat building in Vietnam. Photos taken January 2009. Small boatyard horizontal band saw, Hoi AN Small boat using the planks first method. Hoi An. Boat nearing completion with frames added. Hoi An. Plank on frame construction.Quy Nho&apos;n. Almost completed offshore fishing hull, Quy Nho&apos;n. Plank fixing, trenails and red lead paint, Quy Nho&apos;n. Repaired frames, barge hull. Sa Dec, Mekong Delta. [ See also ] [ 30em ] Center for Wooden Boats Spaulding Wooden Boat Center Stephens Bros. Boat Builders Future Boat Developments Jean-Jacques Herbulot E.G. van de Stadt Lofting Marine propulsion Messabout Outboard motor Propeller Puddle Duck Racer - PDRacer.com Do it yourself Sail Sailboat design and manufacturing Sail-plan Shipbuilding Slipway Sterndrive Stitch and glue Dudley Dix Yacht Design Shipco Workboats, Tugs and Winch Builders NZ [ References ] [ August 2011 ] [ 30em ] Details of Classic Boat Construction, Larry Pardey www.landlpardey.com [ External links ] [ Boat-building ] WoodenBoat Publications Major publisher of construction plans and techniques for traditional boat building methods. amateurboatbuilding.com A site for the home boat builder with a global reach, for amateur boat builders from around the world. Building the boat batana Building and launching of the traditional north Adriatic boat batana. Category:Naval architecture Category:Ship construction bg:Строеж на лодка de:Bootsbau io:Navokonstrukto no:Båtbygging pl:Szkutnictwo sv:Båtbyggnad