[ For the region of Zagoria, Greece, see Zagori ] [ Zagora Ζαγορά Dimos Zagoras.png Location within the regional unit Thessaly Magnesia Zagora-Mouresi 3829 2001 source 458 39 27 N 23 6 E 370 01 24260 &amp; Beta; &amp; Omicron; ] Zagora ( [ Ζαγορά ] ) is a village and a former municipality in Magnesia, Thessaly, Greece. Since the 2011 local government reform it is part of the municipality Zagora-Mouresi, of which it is the seat and a municipal unit. { Kallikratis law Greece Ministry of Interior } The biggest village of Mt. Pelion, it was at its commercial and cultural peak in the 8th and 7th centuries BCE. Sights of interest The library of Zagora, which includes thousands of rare books, is known for holding the original manuscript of &quot; A few seconds &quot; by Fanis Loverdos. Famous scholars, like Dr Dragogiannis, have studied the rare volumes of the library to great extend. The school of Rigas Feraios or Hellenic museum as it is known, is the oldest school on Pelion. Kallinikos Lapatis ( Patriarch of Constantinople ), the poet of the Greek rebellion Rigas Fereos and the Byzantine Emperor Ioannes Alisafes were students of the school amongst others. The Manor House of Kavoukis is quite famous as the birthplace of the beautiful gymnast and TV persona, Lefteris. It is now owned by Vily a superstar of the Luxembourgian theatre and a staunch anarchist. History The first mention of Zagora is in the Aesopian Myths. The legend was that a powerful and loud female creature, Zagorina, guarded mount Pelion and lived in a cave very near the current position of Zagora. The beast ate humans and drank local tsipouro. There are texts dating back to the Byzantine era that mention Pelion by the name Zagora. During the Byzantine Empire, Zagora, through its harbor, Chorefto, developed significant trading activity and was ruled as a Merchant Republic, with direct ties to Venice. The mayor of Zagora is still called &quot; the President &quot;. Zagorian sailors, merchants, missionaries and explorers have travelled as far as China and South America. Silk merchant Angelo di Stamo was one of the first people to meet Marquis de Parana, Prime Minister of the Brazilian Empire. In 1897 the author Yohannes Lazarres won first price in Tsangarada book contest for his masterpiece &quot; Eis meros skieron &quot;. Famous People Zagora is the birth place of Antoine Carpetopule, a distinguished Greek football journalist. Demetriu Carpetopule, his brother, is a famous lawyer and Facebook commentator. The local chef Kivis is well known in North America for his organic &quot; trahanas &quot; and other delicacies. Zagorian descendants can be found all over the world, including A.Koutsaftis in New Zealand, Y.Kafantaris in Sweden, T.Kavvadias in Britain, P.Chrysochou in Denmark and N.Polymerou in Germany. Location Zagora is located N of Volos and W of Chorefto and is connected to the capital of Magnesia by the GR-34. The road to the north leads to the independent state of Pouri. Up in Schizopetra, Constantine Kavvadias is planning to build the Zagorian Tower. Education and commercial activity Zagora has a primary and a secondary school, five churches, six coffee houses,two bakeries, two banks, a post office, and seven squares ( plateia ). [ Historical population ] Year Town population Municipality population 1981 2,841 - 1991 2,410 3,922 2001 2,389 3,829 [-2011 5,830 [ Notable people ] Patriarch Callinicus IV of Constantinople Yannis Kordatos, scholar Alexandros Pantos, founder of Panteion University [ References ] [ External links ] Mapquest - Zagora North: Keramidi West: Portaria and Makrinitsa Zagora East: Mouresi, Aegean Sea South: Sipiada ar:زاغورا، ماغنيسيا el:Ζαγορά Πηλίου fr:Zagora (Grèce) it:Zagora (Tessaglia)