[ the University in Zhanjiang Guangdong Ocean University ] [ CHN ] { Qingdao } { China } { 13,078 } { 5,573 } { 1298 } { Urban, } { ha } { None } The Ocean University of China ( simplified Chinese : 中国海洋大学; pinyin: Zhōngguó Hǎiyáng Dàxué, local: 海大 or Hǎidà), located in Qingdao, is one of the key comprehensive universities under the direct jurisdiction of the Ministry of Education of the People&apos;s Republic of China. It consists of such branches of learning as science, engineering, agronomy (fishery), economics, literature, medical science (pharmaceutics), philosophy and law. The university is especially renowned for its marine sciences and fishery sciences departments. [ History ] The university was first set up in 1924 as a private institution and, with the founding of Shandong College of Oceanology (山东海洋学院) in 1959, became one of the thirteen national key universities in October 1960. In January 1988, it was renamed the Ocean University of Qingdao, and Deng Xiaoping wrote the name of the university in his own calligraphic style to mark the occasion. In October 2002, it was renamed the Ocean University of China with authorization from the Ministry of Education. [ Location ] The university&apos;s main campus is situated on a hill with a view of the sea in a scenic area of Qingdao, a coastal city with a temperate climate, in Shandong province. The university&apos;s main campus (Yushan, considered the most beautiful one [ December 2011 ] ), in Shinan District, and its sub-campus Fushan, in the Laoshan District, cover a combined area of more than 733,000  m², and have a floor space of 230,000  m². A new larger campus named Laoshan in the Laoshan District was opened in the fall of 2006. [ Structure ] [ Colleges ] College of Physical and Environmental Oceanography College of Information Science and Engineering College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering College of Marine Geo-science College of Fisheries College of Marine Life Science College of Food Science and Engineering School of Medicine and Pharmaceutics College of Engineering College of Environmental Science and Engineering College of Management College of Economics College of Foreign Languages College of Liberal Arts, Journalism and Communication School of Law and Political Science College of Mathematical Sciences College of Materials Science and Engineering College of International Education Teaching Center for Fundamental Courses Faculties [ Programs ] The Ocean University of China is one of the first universities authorized by the State Council &apos;s Academic Degree Committee to confer doctoral, master and bachelor degrees. It is also authorized to confer all academic titles including professors and Ph.D. supervisors. Currently, the university offers 71 four-year undergraduate programs administered within 22 junior colleges/departments. 44 doctoral programs are offered under six disciplines and 131 master&apos;s programs are offered under 17 disciplines. In addition, there are six professional master&apos;s degree programs in law, business management, engineering, agriculture, accounting and public administration. { aboutouc } Ocean University of China boasts two national key disciplines (including ten sub-disciplines), 17 provincial key disciplines. Seven key research labs affiliated with Ministry of Education of the People&apos;s Republic of China, nine key research labs affiliated with Shandong Province, and three key research labs affiliated with Qingdao Municipality have been set up in the university. In addition, the university has three engineering research centers affiliated with Ministry of Education of the People&apos;s Republic of China and two engineering research centers affiliated to Shandong Province. The Qingdao Marine Science and Technology National Laboratory, headed by OUC, with an estimated total investment of one billion Chinese yuan, is currently under construction. The university has also set up a national base for training talents to be engaged in basic research and teaching in the fields of oceanology and marine chemistry. The university has approximately 27000 enrolled students, more than 5500 of whom are doctoral and master students and about 1100 are foreign students. The university is staffed with more than 2500 people, with more than a half being professors or lecturers. Many of them are specialists or scholars well-known both at home and abroad. Among them are four academicians of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, three academician of the Chinese Academy of Engineering and more than 250 Ph.D. supervisors. 101 professors enjoy special subsidies from the State Council, 9 professors have been awarded the title of Middle-aged and Young Experts Who Have Made Outstanding Contributions to the State. Mr. Wang Meng, a famous modern Chinese writer, is a professor at OUC, and also an Honorary Dean of the College of Literature, Journalism and Communication. { 中国海洋大学——学校概况 } The university&apos;s objectives are to increase reform in education and teaching, continue to focus on its specialties and to meet the need of social and economic development. Under the school guideline of &quot; Unity, Diligence, Practicality and Creativity &quot;, the university has cultivated a unique educational style and school discipline. Strict teaching and administration have steadily raised the quality of education. The series of measures to reform and promote teaching and learning in the university have won appraisal and support from both teachers and students of the school and from the society at large. [ Facilities ] The university has 73 laboratories and a new 3500-ton marine research vessel Donfanghong 2. The Audio-Visual Education Center, the Computer Center and the Analyzing and Testing Center are all well-equipped. The school library has a collection of 800,000 books and more than 2000 Chinese and foreign journals and periodicals. Journal of Ocean University China (both natural science and social science editions) is a regular publication of the university. The campus computer network with 3,000 user-terminals connected with internet and Cernet has been set up. The university has set up 26 research institutions, among which the Academy of Marine Drugs, the Institute of Physical Oceanography, the institute of Ocean Remote Sensing, and the Academy of Marine Economy and the Law of the Sea are most well known. Being multi-disciplinary, comprehensive and talent-packed, they are mainly engaged in theoretical studies, marine environment investigation and prediction, research in marine economy, marine law, maritime affairs, exploitation and utilization of marine resources, etc. Since the beginning of the Eighth Five-Year Plan period, 65 of the school&apos;s research achievements have reached the international leading or international advanced level, 85 have been considered to be original or advanced in China, and 149 monographs and 3028 academic papers have been published. The research achievements of the university have won 10 international gold medals, 10 national awards, 99 provincial or ministry-level awards and hundreds of municipality-level awards. Besides, the university has got 105 national patents and 4 of the research results have been registered for patents in foreign countries. The university has always laid stress on the training of its teachers and the promotion of foreign academic exchanges. In the past years, half of the teachers of the university has been to foreign countries as students, visiting scholars or guest lecturers. It has established cooperative and exchange relationship with more than 50 universities and research institutions in 35 foreign countries or regions. In April 2006 Senior Biology Major Ding Ding and Junior English Major Yu Yongcui of the OUC Speech and Debate Team reached the semifinals of the Foreign Language Teaching and Research Press &quot; FLTRP Cup &quot; national debate competition. In 1994, the university began to operate under the dual leadership of State Education Commission and the People&apos;s Government of Shandong Province. Successfully passing the strict preliminary assessment and examination for the Project-211 in January 1996 and getting admitted into the project in June 1997, Ocean University of China has entered a new stage of development. [ References ] [ Shandong ] Category:Universities and colleges in Qingdao Category:Project 211 de:Ocean University of China zh:中国海洋大学