[ Philippines ] { Region } { MIMAROPA (Region IV-B) } { Province } { Oriental Mindoro } { District } { 2nd District of Oriental Mindoro } { Founded } { 1908 } { Barangays } { para } { 37 } { Liberal Party } { Mayor } { Wilfredo Hernandez Sr } { Vice Mayor } { Roberto Morente } { Councillor } { 1. Mirasol G. Jamilla 2.Rodolfo M. Magsino 3. Arnel G. Abrenica 4. Dunhill Marcelo M. Delmo V 5. Severino J. Narito 6. Jeoffrey Paul A. Umbao 7. Edwin G. Hernandez 8. Epifano P. Real } { 77119 } { 2007 } { PST } { +8 } { ZIP code } { Dialing code } { March 22, 2009 } { Income class } { 1st class; partially urban } { http://www.pinamalayan.gov.ph } Pinamalayan is a 1st class Municipality in the province of Oriental Mindoro, Philippines. The name Pinamalayan comes from the word &quot; ipinamalay &quot;, meaning &quot; made aware or made known &quot;. According to the 2007 census, it has a population of 77,119 people in 14,326 households. [ History ] A group of adventurous immigrants left Marinduque for an unknown destination. After many days of voyage, the “Council of Elders” of the group gazed at the rainbow on their westward bound. One of the crews shouted, “ipinamalay”; the voyagers decided to charter the sailing vessel towards the rainbow proceeding to “Lumang-bayan”, what is now called Pinamalayan. The town of Ipinamalay (now Pinamalayan) is close to the shore on the river of the same name about 2-3/4 miles- southwestward of Bugot Point. The Pinamalayan River whose source originates from the mountains north of the town empties at the mouth of the old Lumang-Bayan River. Stretching from Mount Dumali in the northeastern part of the island (751 miles) high and prominent, the coastal trends southward with a succession of sweeping curves towards Pinamalayan Bay to Duyagan Point. The town is bounded on the north by Babahurin Hill and extends towards the northwest which meets the town of Pola. Towards the south and north, the town lies on an extensive plain and is low and flat towards the south direction to Balete and up to the boundary of Bongabon. About 90% of its area is located on its level plain which extends into the interior. It is intersected by three rivers, namely; the Lumangbayan, the Balete and the Pula Rivers which are short and never navigable. The town is exposed to the northeast monsoon, but with the mountain facing north, it is safe from that direction. The history of the town has its ancient beginning antedating far back with the advent of the Marinduque settlers in the early part of the 18th century who landed on the shores of the old settlement at Lumang-bayan. The first village was implanted there by the newcomers pushing back the pagans into the interior. In the course of time and subjected by the ravages of Moro piracy, the natives had to fight back the buccaneers as well as the tulisanes at the end of the 19th century. The old Lumang-bayan was the town up to its transfer to the present site on or about 1914. The Recollect Order first established a part of the second ecclesiastic district of Naujan and extend as far as Bongabon,, assigning St. Agustine as its titular (Patron Saint). The pattern of this town’s territorial expansion dated back during the Spanish time when the villagers of Pinamalayan, Pola, Sumagui, Anilao and Bongabon belonged to one ministry district. That pattern was closely adhered to in the later part of the Spanish regime from 1888-1890. It was organized as a permanent settlement with Juan Morente, Sr. as gobernadorcillo and succeeded by his son, Juan Morente, Jr., as Captain (Mayor) in 1890-1894. When the revolution broke out against Spain, Pinamalayan took up arms and underwent some government changes under the provisional Malolos government headed by Juan Medina in 1898. In the Filipino-American War, the American forces took possession of the town, placed it under a military regime from 1901 to 1902; appointed Cornelio Nable as its first President under the new civil government. Reorganized on April 28, 1904 under Act No. 1135 of the Philippine Commission, the municipalities of Bongabon and Pola were annexed to Pinamalayan as barrios. In the following year, on January 4, 1905, under Act No. 1280, the municipality of Pola was annexed to Pinamalayan as a barrio. In 1914, Pinamalayan was organized as a regular municipality. Since then, a new town site has been proposed, selected and surveyed for expansion. This new town site was planned by Governor Juan Morente, Jr. and Mr. Thomas I. Weeks. In 1914 to 1916, during these years under review, the national high way to Pinamalayan has also been proposed and completed in 1931. In January 1912, Pola was separated from Pinamalayan as township and in 1920, Bongabon was separated from Pinamalayan as a municipal district under Act No. 2824 of March 15, 1919. Agriculture and business developments gradually increased with opening of roads. More people immigrated since then; this position of publics land has hastened; homesteading increased and greater areas of uncultivated lands were turned to production. On or about January 20, 1942, the Japanese Army from Calapan occupied the town and appointed Carlos Aguilocho and M. Medina as occupation Mayors. On or about January 15, 1945, the American Army from San Jose landed at Pinamalayan and liberated it from the enemy. Substantial progress has been made in the rehabilitation of the town since 1946. Municipal roads were repaired and extended, three big bridges were constructed (Balete, Nabuslot, and Lumambayan), a water system and a new market were constructed, a puericulture center and the beautification of the town plaza were undertaken. In 1948, Quinabigan was declared a national sub-port. The town is composed of six big barrios, namely; Lumang-bayan, Quinabigan, Nabuslot, Panggulayan, Maligaya, and Balete. As presently constituted after the separation of Pola and Bongabon, the present area is 556  km 2. or 55, 600 hectares. The population which was 2, 437 in 1903 increased to 8,606 in 1918. By 1939, the population increased to 16, 086 or 46% between the two census periods. By 1948, it jumped to 21,754 or an increase of 5,668 between 1939 and 1948 or 22%. This abrupt rise has been due mainly to the facilities of good transportation system. The population is mostly Tagalog who came from Batangas and Marinduque, Pinamalayan, one of the ranking producers of coconuts, exported 850 pounds of copra valued at P2, 000,000 in 1950. These fertile plains are devoted to yearly rice production making it a source of supply for Marinduque, Tablas and neighboring localities. The municipality is one of the premier producers of bananas, a variety of forest products are gathered; a diversification of crops, vegetables and fruit trees are being accomplished. It accounts for a variety of fish products from the sea; some fish ponds are now being developed; ranked second to none in the manufacture of wooden shoes, a distributing center of retail and wholesale trade for Sibaly and Bongabon, it has a busy market in the poblacion and a barrio market at Nabuslot. It is not only a coconut region, but it is also a retail and wholesale trade center. It stands with 5 drug stores, 74 dry goods stores, 2 jewelry and repair shops, 4 bars, and refreshment parlors, 4 barber shops, 3 furniture houses, 5 restaurants, 2 gasoline stations, 4 tailor shops, 4 bakeries, 4 photographers, 20 Chinese stores, 5 lumber and hardware dealers, 5 cockpits, 2 contractors, a PRISCO store, 16 copra dealers, 3 wooden shoe factories, 1 theatre, 36 public market stall holders, 17 fishermen, and 46 tuba dealers. In the field of education, it ranks first in the number of private high schools (three) and one collegiate level. It boasts of 26 barrio and 8 elementary schools with 114 teachers in 1950; it has a puericulture, an electric and ice plant; it has a Catholic church, one Iglesia Ni Cristo chapel; it has several religious organizations and a beautiful park. Pinamalayan’s semi-circular waterfront affords excellent anchorage for vessels of inter-island type and visited weekly by steamers direct from Manila via Marinduque. It also affords an anchorage for ocean-going vessels in the sub-port of Quinabigan where copra is shipped every three months. It stands mid-way in the national high way to Bongabon and to Calapan. The Borbon and Halcon buses make this town a terminal and transport system. In the field of communication service, it has postal and telegraphic services, serving a wide area of 21,000 souls. It boasts also of its 2 light houses, one at Punta Dumali and other in town proper. The assessed value of private property was P361, 317.75 in 1916 to P791, 622.00 in 1920. The coconut industry is responsible for its increase in valuation which by 1928, it grows to P2,055,410.00. In 1950, as a result of the high price of coconuts, palay and the number of people owing lands, together with increase turnover of business, the revised valuation amounted to P3,428,720.00, exempt P221,670. The total budget for 1950 amounted to P73,585.12 of which P35,228.64 came from revenue from taxation; P5,067.72 from incidental revenue; P12,963.75 from market collection; property tax amounted P9,718.30; municipal license P12,809.00; fisheries, P1,600.45. The total current expenses in 1950 amounted to P30,909.99, of which the biggest item went to salaries and wages representing 57% of the total current expenses; maintenance, P2,743.62; capital outlays roads, bridges; waterworks and others P52,127.12. Former presidents: Cornelio Nable (1901–1902), Juan Aguilocho (1902–1903), Vicente Dominguez (1903–1904), Florencio Morente (1905–1906), Juan Morente (1907–1912), Jesus Dominuez (1913–1915), Jose Benitez (1915–1916), Elias Semilla (1916–1919), Carlos Aguilocho, Francisco Laurea (1925–1928), Anacleto Villamin (1928–1929), Conrado M. Morente (1929–1930, 1931–1934), Felipe Venturanza (1934–1938), (1938–1940), Dr. Abelardo Bunag (1941–1942), Carlos Aguilocho (1942–1943), Manuel Medina (1943–1945), Thomas B. Villamin (1946–1947).Dominador Madrid (1948–1951), Dr. Pio Baldos (1952–1955). The town of Pinamalayan is close to the shore at the mouth of the river of the same name. The town’s name was said to be taken from the word “ipinamalay” which means to make aware or to show the way. According to an old story, the early settlers of this town came from Marinduque. While they were on their way to Mindoro in their big bancas, they encountered turbulent weather and lost their way. They prayed to God Almighty for deliverance and guidance, whereupon, the weather cleared and a rainbow appeared on the horizon. The crew shouted “ipinamalayan” (it was made known). They followed the direction of the rainbow believing that at its en lies a pot of gold and good fortune. They finally landed at what is now Barangay Lumambayan and established the first settlement which they named Pinamalayan. They found good fortune in the new land which brought them prosperity because of the good soil and abundant resources. Some other sources attribute the name Pinamalayan simply to the fact that the area was once a vast area planted to rice, hence the name “pinagpalayan” or “Pinamalayan”. Since then the place grew and became a town. However during the entire 18th century, Pinamalayan was one of the coastal areas frequently attacked by Moro Pirates. People were decimated and many field to the interior for safety. In spite of all these, the town site remained in that place until 1916 when it was transferred by the Americans to its present site. In the year 1888 the territory of Pinamalayan included the settlements of Pola, Sumagui, and Anilao. At that time, the gobernadorcillo was Juan Morente, Jr., who assumed position until 1898 when the uprising against the Spanish government broke out. Morente Jr. joined the revolutionary forces as a captain. Juan Medina replaced him as the town head. When the Spaniards surrendered, Morente Jr. became governor of the province of Mindoro while Cornelio Nable was appointed as the municipal president. On April 28, 1904 under the American government, the towns of Pola and Bongabon were consolidated with Pinamalayan by Virtue of Act 1155. It was only on January 12, 1912 when Pola regained its status as a regular town. Bongabon likewise regained its township status in March 1919 under Act 2824. During the American period, the town was transferred to its present site. The American planners made sure that this new town will be laid out properly according to a planning system of wide symmetrical vertical and horizontal roads with proper drainage facilities. A big plaza was further constructed in front of the municipal building. Pinamalayan still stands as a model in town planning to all the municipalities in Oriental Mindoro. When the Japanese occupied Mindoro in 1942, Dr. Abelardo Bunag, the mayor, joined the underground movement. The Japanese appointed Carlos Aguilucho followed by Manuel Medina until the Americans returned on January 15, 1945. The town steadily grew from 1947 to 1990 under various administrations. There are now two private colleges and three secondary schools and several Barangay high schools. A private sports complex may be found in Zone I. Interesting tourist destinations include the beaches of Pili, Banilad and Ranzo. At the peak of Mount Longos, one can see the panoramic vista of the stretch of sea that separates eastern Mindoro from Marinduque and the Tres Reyes islands. Other areas that would interest mountaineers are the towering ranges of Mt. Dumali, Mt. Beyer, Mt. Worcester, the Agus Hill and Bongol Point. The middle of 17th and 18th century was the height of Spanish-Moro Wars that during this century, Moro raids broke loose in Mindoro. Many residents were killed or captured and sold in the slave markets in the south. Others more fortunate ones fled for their lives to other provinces. In fact, its history throughout the 17th and 18th century (1600–1800) about 200 years was practically a story of constant struggle between the native and the Moro pirates. Pola, because of the strategic location of the Pola Bay, became a convenient stop over and launching area of the Moro’s sporadic attacks against the larger settlements of Naujan and Calapan. From the coast of Pola, they can see the approaching enemies either on the northern or the southern side. Consequently, Pola’s population never grew up because many inhabitants were dispersed deeper into the hills to avoid the hostilities and being captured by the Muslims. The Moros established two strongholds: in Mamburao and in Balete, Calapan. From these two bases, the Moros sailed forth to attack the defenseless villages, destroying properties and subjecting the natives into slavery. As a result of these depredations, the whole villages in the eastern part of the island including Pola were destroyed and as such, abandoned by some of the inhabitants. Thus, a gloomy picture is presented: the villages were wiped out from the Mindoro map. A document from Mexico revealed that in 1754 alone, 21 Pola residents representing 18% of the population were captured by the Moro raiders. At the height of the Moro raids, the Recollect Missionaries gave up the island of Mindoro in 1776 for several reasons: one of which was the lack of personnel brought about by the raiders who either kill or capture for ransom the helpless missionaries. Pola was well on its way while its neighboring village of Pinamalayan was doomed to its end when the Provincial Government requested Manila to force the Pinamalayan settlers to move to Pola in 1843. This was particularly recommended by the Naujan parish priest, a Tagalog secular priest Baltazar Narvaez. It was because Pinamalayan and Mansalay were totally deserted by the natives for fear of Moro attacks. This was primarily due to the 1836 Moro raid, where Pinamalayan was left in disarray with a very few survivors: 19 adults, 7 dependents and about 5 houses. These few survivors rallied behind their Cavesa de Barangay Teniente Agapito dela Cruz, a young man from Aklan and petitioned the authorities for a grace period of just one year to increase the number of houses and settlers in Pinamalayan. The promised increase did not come in one year, but the settlers’ decisive move, led by Teniente Dela Cruz, saved Pinamalayan from extinction. For a long time, the Spanish authority was unable to put to an end the Moro depredations. The successful expeditions of Governor General Simon de Anda in 1762–1764 and 1770–1776 served to put an end to the piracy, but no sooner had the Spanish forces been withdrawn, piracy was resumed. [ Barangays ] Pinamalayan is politically subdivided into 37 barangays. Anoling Bacungan Bangbang Banilad Buli Cacawan Calingag Del Razon Guinhawa Inclanay Lumambayan Malaya Maliancog Maningcol Marayos Marfrancisco Nabuslot Pagalagala Palayan Pambisan Malaki Pambisan Munti Panggulayan Papandayan Pili Quinabigan Ranzo Rosario Sabang Sta. Isabel Sta. Maria Sta. Rita Sto. Nino Wawa Zone I Zone II Zone III Zone IV [ Schools ] [ Tertiary ] ABADA College - Brgy. Marfrancisco CLJC Center for Excellence &amp; Development Academy Foundation - Brgy. Marfrancisco Eastern Mindoro Institute of Technology &amp; Science (EMITS) - Brgy. Zone II International Advance Technology Education Center (IATEC) - Brgy. Sta. Rita Institute of Business Science and Medical Arts (IBSMA) - Brgy. Marfrancisco Luna Goco Colloges - Brgy. Marfrancisco Pinamalayan Maritime Foundation Incorporated (PMFTII) - Brgy. Marfrancisco Pinamalayan School of Sciences and Technology (PSST) - Brgy. Zone IV Southwestern Institute of Business and Technology (SIBTECH) - Brgy. Panggulayan Divine World College of Calapan (DWCC) - Brgy. Zone 2 [ Secondary ] ABADA College High School Department - Brgy. Marfrancisco Anoling Extension High School (NNHS - Anoling Ext.) - Brgy. Anoling Calingag Extension High School (NNHS - Calingag Ext.) - Brgy. Calingag Eastern Mindoro Institute of Technology and Sciences (EMITS) High School Department - Brgy. Zone II Immaculate Heart of Mary Academy (IHMA) - Brgy. Zone II Jesus is Lord High School - Brgy. Sta. Rita Nabuslot National High School (NNHS - Main) - Brgy. Nabuslot Pambisan Extension High School (NNHS - Pambisan Mnti. Ext.) - Brgy. Pambisan Munti Pambisan National High School - Brgy. Pambisan Malaki Pili National High School - Brgy. Pili Quinabigan National High School - Brgy. Quinabigan Ranzo National High School - Brgy. Ranzo Sabang Extension High School (NNHS - Sabang Ext.) - Brgy. Sabang Philippians Academy of Leaders (PAL Mission School) - Brgy. Zone 3 [ Elementary ] Pinamalayan East District Public Schools Banilad Elementary School - Brgy. Banilad Buli Elementary School - Brgy. Buli Dona Asuncion Reyes Memorial Elementary School - Brgy. Zone 1 Lumambayan Elementary School - Brgy. Lumambayan Malaya Elementary School - Brgy. Malaya Natividad De Joya Elementary School - Brgy. Guinhawa Papandayan Elementary School - Brgy. Papandayan Pili Elementary School - Brgy. Pili Quinabigan Elementary School - Brgy. Quinabigan Ranzo Elementary School - Brgy. Ranzo Rosario Elementary School - Brgy. Rosario Sta. Isabel Elementary School - Brgy. Sta. Isabel Upper Bongol Elementary School - Brgy. Pili Cacawan Elementary School - Brgy. Cacawan Juan Morente Sr. Memorial Pilot School - Brgy. Zone 4 Private schools Maria Loreto Integrated School Foundation Inc. (MLISFI) - Brgy. Zone 2 Pinamalayan Anglo School (PAS) - Brgy. Zone 1 Pinamalayan Adventist Elementary School (PAES) - Brgy.Zone 3 ABADA College Elementary Department - Brgy. Marfrancisco EMITS Elementary Department - Brgy. Zone 2 Pinamalayan West District Public Schools Anoling Elementary School - Brgy. Anoling Bacungan Elementary School - Brgy. Bacungan Bangbang Elementary School - Brgy. Bangbang Calingag Elementary School - Brgy. Calingag Inclanay Elementary School - Brgy. Inclanay Maliancog Elementary School - Brgy. Maliancog Maningcol Elementary School - Brgy. Maningcol Marayos Elementary School - Brgy. Marayos Miguel Ansaldo Sr. Memorial Elementary School (MASMES) - Brgy. Pambisan Malaki Nabuslot Central School - Brgy. Nabuslot Pagalagala Elementary School - Brgy. Pagalagala Pambisan Munti Elementary School - Brgy. Pambisan Munti Panggulayan Elementary School - Brgy. Panggulayan Sabang Elementary School - Brgy. Sabang Safa Elementary School - Brgy. Sabang Sta. Rita Elementary School - Brgy. Sta. Rita Private Schools Metamorphosis Child Development and Care Center (MCDCC) - Brgy. Sta. Rita Jesus Is Lord Christian School (JILCS) - Brgy. Sta. Rita Philippians Academy of Leaders (PAL Mission School) - Brgy. Zone 3 Maria Loreto School Foundation, Inc. (MLSFI)- Brgy. Zone 3 [ Places &amp; amp; tourist spots ] Pinamalayan Municipal Theme Park Pinamalayan Butterfly Garden The Triangle Pot/ Rainbow Junction Colorful Madrid Boulevard Blue Waves Beach Resort Magdalena Beach Resort Glair Inland Resort Bulaklakan Beach Resort Edan Sigue Palace Resort Atlantica Urban Resort The Island Creek Banilad White Beach Wawa Port Recodo Port [ Restaurants &amp; amp; fastfoods ] Akiyoko&apos;s Restaurant Bonita Onin&apos;s Grill Hong Kong Restaurant Hungry Kings Jamilla&apos;s Fastfood and Restaurant Jollistar Fastfood La Paulina Lots A&apos; Pizza Macau Restaurant Mas Klik Foodhaus Olympia Restaurant Zagu [ Shopping Malls ] Cathy-Mark Mini-Mart King&apos;s Powermart [ Notable people ] Ralph Salazar - Little Big Star Champion Little Division Angelo Garcia - Second Runner-Up Pinoy Dream Academy [ External links ] Municipality of Pinamalayan Official Website Philippine Standard Geographic Code 2007 Philippine Census Information Local Governance Performance Management System [ 13 00 N 121 25 E title region:PH_type:adm2nd_source:GNS-enwiki ] Category:Municipalities of Oriental Mindoro de:Pinamalayan ilo:Pinamalayan, Oriental Mindoro id:Pinamalayan, Oriental Mindoro it:Pinamalayan pam:Pinamalayan, Oriental Mindoro nl:Pinamalayan tl:Pinamalayan, Oriental Mindoro vi:Pinamalayan war:Pinamalayan, Oriental Mindoro