[ #660099 ] {   } [ #FFFFFF ] The University of Wisconsin –Whitewater (also known as UW–Whitewater ) is part of the University of Wisconsin System, located in Whitewater, Wisconsin, United States. It became the state&apos;s second public college on April 21, 1868 when it opened its doors to 39 students taught by nine faculty members. It is a four-year, co-educational, residential college accredited by the North Central Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools. Enrollment in 2010-11 stood at over 11,500. The chancellor is Richard Telfer. [ History ] The school was first founded in 1868 as Whitewater Normal School. In 1927, it changed its name to Whitewater Teachers College. It became Wisconsin State College–Whitewater in 1951 and Wisconsin State University–Whitewater in 1964. In 1971, after the merger of former University of Wisconsin and the former Wisconsin State Universities, the school became part the University of Wisconsin System and has the name of University of Wisconsin–Whitewater since then. [ Campus ] Historic schoolhouse on UWW campus. In 1925 an addition of an East wing to Old Main Hall was opened. It was later renamed Hyer Hall in honor of former school president Frank S. Hyer in 1968. On February 7, 1970 &quot; Old Main &quot; hall burned. The central, north and west towers burned down along with the bell tower. The only surviving wing—Hyer Hall—underwent a $6.4 million restoration in 1997. It was completed by 1999 and included many 21st century technologies. It now houses many of the University&apos;s administrative offices in addition to classrooms and lecture halls. [ Student government ] Whitewater Student Government (WSG) is the students&apos; governing body. It consists of the Senate, the President and Vice President, and the Executive Board. Whitewater Student Government has the primary responsibility for the formulation and review of policies concerning student life, services and interests according to Wisconsin State Statute 36.09(5). [ Extracurricular activities ] [ Royal Purple ] Royal Purple The Royal Purple is an independent student-run newspaper that provides students, faculty and staff with a forum for news, entertainment, and sporting events. and an open forum for opinions and commentary on events and issues that affect the students. [ Jitters Coffee Lounge ] Jitters is a student-ran coffee house located on the first floor of Wells East Residence Hall. In early 1997 a few creative people started to show interest and support for creating a coffeehouse in their building. Jitters helps to create a lasting, strong, and vital sense of community. It grew to become a place for the campus&apos;s artists, poets, authors, musicians, actors, comedians, dancers and other assorted folks to enjoy a coffee and several ice cream drinks that make jitters what it is today. [ Greek system ] Social fraternities and sororities carry traditions and history at UW–Whitewater. These organizations are involved with annual philanthropy (community service) projects, homecoming week activities, socials (also known as exchanges) between other Greek organizations or general student organizations, scholarship opportunities for members, and professional networking skills and opportunities. [ InterFraternal Council Fraternities ] Alpha Sigma Phi Lambda Chi Alpha Lambda Alpha Upsilon Phi Chi Epsilon Phi Mu Alpha Pi Kappa Alpha Delta Chi Sigma Tau Gamma Lambda Theta Phi [ Panhellenic Council Sororities ] Alpha Sigma Delta Zeta Sigma Sigma Sigma Gamma Alpha Omega sorority [ National Panhellenic Council Fraternities &amp; amp; Sororities ] Alpha Phi Alpha Alpha Kappa Alpha Delta Sigma Theta Sigma Gamma Rho Omega Psi Phi Phi Beta Sigma Zeta Phi Beta [ Athletics ] Mascot [ Wisconsin–Whitewater Warhawks ] UW–Whitewater is a member of NCAA Division III for athletics. It is a member of the Wisconsin Intercollegiate Athletic Conference (WIAC). The athletics teams are nicknamed the Warhawks and wear purple and white. On December 15, 2007 in Salem, Virginia the UW–Whitewater men&apos;s football team won their first NCAA Division III national championship at the Amos Alonzo Stagg Bowl in a 31-21 victory over the Mount Union College Purple Raiders. This was the third consecutive year that the Warhawks faced the Purple Raiders in the Stagg Bowl, losing the previous two meetings. It was also the first year for new head coach Lance Leipold, having replaced the retired Bob Berezowitz. { JS Online: Never saw it coming } { D3football.com: UW–Whitewater 31, Mount Union 21 } 2007 Gagliardi Trophy Winner Justin Beaver (Running Back) was named the Offensive Player of the year by D3Football.com and Coach Lance Leipold was named Coach of the Year as well. { D3football.com: 2007 All-Americans } In 2009 UW-Whitewater men&apos;s football won their 2nd NCAA Division III national championship. This was the 5th consecutive year Warhawks faced the Purple raiders, going 2-3 in the championship games in the last 5 years. On December 18, 2010 UW-Whitewater met Mount Union for the sixth consecutive year in the NCAA Division III national championship. UW-Whitewater defeated Mount Union 31-21, winning their 3rd NCAA Division III title. On December 16, 2011 UW-Whitewater won their 3rd consecutive NCAA Division III national championship (4th overall) defeating Mount Union 13-10. This was the 7th consecutive title game featuring the two teams. On March 17th, 2012 UW-Whitewater won the NCAA Division III national championship for Basketball defeating Cabrini University. This was the 3rd overall national championship title for the UW-Whitewater men&apos;s basketball team. [ Notable alumni ] [ January 2010 ] Bidal Aguero - Hispanic political activist and newspaper publisher in Lubbock, Texas; received master&apos;s degree in music in 1974 Merton W. Baker - U.S. Air Force Major General John Belushi - Saturday Night Live comedian (attended) Gene Brabender - MLB player for the Baltimore Orioles and Seattle Pilots/Milwaukee Brewers Walter B. Calvert - Wisconsin State Assemblyman Thomas B. Clark - former Chairman, President &amp; CEO of Jarden Corporation Craig Coshun - pre-game host and sideline reporter for the Milwaukee Brewers on the Fox Sports Network Vilnis Ezerins - former football player for the Los Angeles Rams B. Gunar Gruenke - President of Conrad Schmitt Studios Kenn Hoekstra - game developer and producer at Pi Studios Isabella Hofmann - actress (attended) Jim Holperin - Wisconsin State Senator Jeff Jagodzinski - football coach for the Green Bay Packers and Boston College Neal Kedzie - State Senator Dave Kraayeveld - NFL player Bill Lobenstein - former football player for the Denver Broncos Thomas A. Loftus - United States Ambassador to Norway from 1993 to 1997; former speaker of the State Assembly Barbara Lorman - Wisconsin State Senator John T. Manske - Wisconsin State Assemblyman Max Maxfield - Wyoming State Auditor (1999–2007) and Secretary of State (2007-) Grant R. Mulder - U.S. Air Force Major General Mark Neumann - U.S. Congressman Reince Priebus - Chairman of the Republican National Committee A. J. Raebel - football player formerly for the Minnesota Vikings and Saskatchewan Roughriders Stuart Rindy - former football player for the Chicago Bears Pete Schmitt - former football player for the Washington Redskins John W. Scherer - TV&apos;sVideo Professor Derek Stanley - former football player for the St. Louis Rams Eric Studesville - interim head coach for the Denver Broncos Justin Stuppy - former baseball player for the Anaheim Angels Matt Turk - Houston Texans punter Bob Wickman - baseball player for the Arizona Diamondbacks Dwight A. York - Wisconsin State Assemblyman Noel Gillespie - assistant head coach for the Phoenix Suns William C. Neitzel - adult film entertainer - (Attended) [ Notable faculty ] Thomas Chrowder Chamberlin, Founder of the Journal of Geology Brian Coppola, noted chemist Alison Townsend, poet Warren S. Johnson, inventor of the first electric room thermostat, founder of Johnson Controls [ References ] [ 2 ] [ Further reading ] Bohi, M. Janette. A History of Wisconsin State University, Whitewater, 1868-1968. Whitewater, Wis.: Whitewater State University Foundation, 1967. [ External links ] [ University of Wisconsin–Whitewater ] UWW official website UWW athletics site UWW Harold G. Andersen Library website [ January 2007 ] [ Wisconsin ] Category:Universities and colleges in Wisconsin Category:University of Wisconsin System Category:American Association of State Colleges and Universities Wisconsin–Whitewater, University of Category:Education in Walworth County, Wisconsin Category:Educational institutions established in 1868 Category:North Central Association of Colleges and Schools Category:Buildings and structures in Walworth County, Wisconsin Category:Visitor attractions in Walworth County, Wisconsin * fr:Université du Wisconsin-Whitewater