Pinhas Lavon The Lavon Affair refers to a failed Israel i covert operation, code named Operation Susannah, conducted in Egypt in the Summer of 1954. As part of the false flag operation, { Global terrorism James M. Lutz, Brenda J. Lutz 2004 ISBN 0-415-70051-5 pp46,Retrieved 7 June 2011 } a group of Egyptian Jews were recruited by Israeli military intelligence for plans to plant bombs inside Egyptian, American and British -owned targets. The attacks were to be blamed on the Muslim Brotherhood, Egyptian Communists, &quot; unspecified malcontents &quot; or &quot; local nationalists &quot; with the aim of creating a climate of sufficient violence and instability to induce the British government to retain its occupying troops in Egypt&apos;s Suez Canal zone. The operation caused no casualties, except for those members of the cell who committed suicide after being captured. The operation became known as the Lavon Affair after the Israeli defense minister Pinhas Lavon, who was forced to resign because of the incident, or euphemistically as the Unfortunate Affair or The Bad Business ( [ העסק ביש ], HaEsek Bish or העסק הביש, HaEsek HaBish). After being denied for 51 years, the surviving agents were in 2005 officially honored with a certificate of appreciation by the Israeli President Moshe Katzav. [ http://www.ynetnews.com/Ext/Comp/ArticleLayout/CdaArticlePrintPreview/1%2C2506%2CL-3065838%2C00.html Israel honors 9 Egyptian spies Reuters March 30, 2005 Ynet Reuters ] [ Operation Susannah ] [ Aim ] In the early 1950s, the United States initiated a more activist policy of support for Egyptian nationalism; this was often in contrast with British policies of maintaining its regional hegemony. Israel feared that this policy, which encouraged Britain to withdraw its military forces from the Suez Canal, would embolden Egyptian President Nasser &apos;s military ambitions towards Israel. Israel first sought to influence this policy through diplomatic means but was frustrated. [ Hahn Peter L United States, Great Britain, and Egypt, 1945-1956: Strategy and Diplomacy 2004 UNC Press 978-0-8078-1942-5 187 In late 1954, the Anglo-Egyptian base agreement and American plans to promote a Northern tier security arrangement generated tension between Israel and Egypt. Israeli officials feared that British troop withdrawal from the Canal zone... would encourage Egyptian aggressiveness toward Israel and remove Western leverage to modify Egyptian behavior on issues such as Suez Canal restrictions ] In the summer of 1954 Colonel Binyamin Gibli, the chief of Israel&apos;s military intelligence, Aman, initiated Operation Susannah in order to reverse that decision. The goal of the Operation was to carry out bombings and other acts of espionage in Egypt with the aim of creating an atmosphere in which the British and American opponents of British withdrawal from Egypt would be able to gain the upper hand and block the British withdrawal from Egypt. According to historian Shabtai Teveth, who wrote one of the more detailed accounts, the assignment was &quot; To undermine Western confidence in the existing [Egyptian] regime by generating public insecurity and actions to bring about arrests, demonstrations, and acts of revenge, while totally concealing the Israeli factor. The team was accordingly urged to avoid detection, so that suspicion would fall on the Muslim Brotherhood, the Communists, &apos;unspecified malcontents&apos; or &apos;local nationalists&apos;. &quot; { S. Teveth, Ben-Gurion&apos;s spy: the story of the political scandal that shaped modern Israel. Columbia University Press, 1996, ISBN 978-0-231-10464-7, p.81. } [ The secret cell ] The top-secret cell, Unit 131 [ http://www.jpost.com/Israel/Article.aspx?id%3D111769 Binyamin Gibli, Lavon Affair figure, dies at 89 Jerusalem Post 08/20/2008 May 25, 2012 Lappin, Yaakov ], which was to carry out the operation, had existed since 1948 and under Aman since 1950. At the time of Operation Susannah, Unit 131 was the subject of a bitter dispute between Aman (military intelligence) and Mossad (national intelligence agency) over who should control it. Unit 131 operatives had been recruited several years before, when the Israeli intelligence officer Avram Dar arrived in Cairo undercover as a British citizen of Gibraltar called John Darling. He had recruited several Egyptian Jews who had previously been active in illegal emigration activities and trained them for covert operations. [ Operation commenced ] Aman decided to activate the network in the Spring of 1954. On July 2, the cell firebombed a post office in Alexandria, [ Black Ian Morris Benny Ian Black (journalist) Benny Morris Israel&apos;s secret wars: a history of Israel&apos;s intelligence services http://books.google.com/books?id%3DWFm21j2sZBAC 19 June 2011 1 June 1992 Grove Press 978-0-8021-3286-4 111 ] and on July 14, it bombed the libraries of the U.S. Information Agency in Alexandria and Cairo and a British-owned theater. The homemade bombs, consisting of bags containing acid placed over nitroglycerine, were inserted into books, and placed on the shelves of the libraries just before closing time. Several hours later, as the acid ate through the bags, the bombs would explode. They did little damage to the targets and caused no injuries or deaths. Meir Max Bineth Before the group began the operation, Israeli agent Avri Elad (Avraham Zeidenberg) was sent to oversee the operations. Elad assumed the identity of Paul Frank, a former SS officer with Nazi underground connections. Avri Elad allegedly informed the Egyptians, resulting in the Egyptian Intelligence Service following a suspect to his target, the Rio Theatre, where a fire engine was standing by. Egyptian authorities arrested this suspect, Philip Natanson, when his bomb accidentally ignited prematurely in his pocket. Having searched his apartment, they found incriminating evidence and names of accomplices to the operation. Several suspects were arrested, including Egyptian Jews and undercover Israelis. Colonel Dar and Elad had managed to escape. Two suspects, Yosef Carmon and Hungarian -born Israeli Meir Max Bineth committed suicide in prison. [ Trials and jail ] The Egyptian trial began on December 11 and lasted until January 27, 1955; two of the accused ( Moshe Marzouk and Shmuel Azar) were condemned to execution by hanging, two were acquitted, and the rest receiving lengthy prison terms. The trial was criticised in Israel as a show trial, although strict Israeli military censorship of the press, at the time, meant that the Israeli public was kept in the dark about the facts of the case and, in fact, were led to believe that the defendants were innocent. [ Shlaim Avi The Iron Wall 2000 Penguin Books 978-0-14-028870-4 117–119 Sharett knew that a death sentence would have a disastrous effect at home because the Israeli public had been led to believe that the defendants were innocent ] There were allegations that evidence had been extracted by torture. [ http://www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org/jsource/History/lavon.html The Lavon Affair Jewish Virtual Library 2008-10-29 ] After serving seven year jail sentences, two of the imprisoned operatives, Meir Meyuhas and Meir Za&apos;afran, were released in 1962. The rest were eventually freed in February 1968, in a secret addendum to a prisoner of war exchange. Soon after the affair, Mossad chief Isser Harel expressed suspicion to Aman concerning the integrity of Avri Elad. Despite his concerns, Aman continued using Elad for intelligence operations until 1956, when he was caught trying to sell Israeli documents to the Egyptians. Elad was tried in Israel and sentenced to 10 years imprisonment. In 1980, Harel publicly revealed evidence that Elad had been turned by the Egyptians even before Operation Susannah. [ Political aftermath ] [ Denial and first inquiry ] In meetings with prime minister Moshe Sharett, minister of defense Pinhas Lavon denied any knowledge of the operation. When intelligence chief Gibli contradicted Lavon, Sharrett commissioned a board of inquiry consisting of Israeli Supreme Court Justice Isaac Olshan and the first chief of staff of the Israel Defense Forces, Yaakov Dori that was unable to find conclusive evidence that Lavon had authorized the operation. Lavon tried to fix the blame on Shimon Peres, who was the secretary general of the defense ministry, and Gibli for insubordination and criminal negligence. Sharett resolved the dilemma by siding with Peres, who along with Moshe Dayan testified against Lavon, after which Lavon resigned, 17 February 1955. Former prime minister David Ben-Gurion succeeded Lavon as minister of defense. A short time later, Sharett, who did not know about the operation in advance, and who had strongly denied Israel&apos;s involvement, resigned as Prime Minister and was replaced by Ben-Gurion. [ Subsequent revelations and inquiries ] In April 1960, a review of minutes from the inquiry found inconsistencies and possibly a fraudulent document in Gibli&apos;s original testimony that seemed to support Lavon&apos;s account of events. During this time, it also came to light that Elad (the Israeli agent running Operation Susannah in Egypt), had committed perjury during the original inquiry. Elad was also suspected of betraying the group to Egyptian authorities; though the charges were never proven, he was eventually sentenced to a jail term of 10 years. Ben-Gurion scheduled closed hearings with a new board of inquiry chaired by Haim Cohn, a supreme court justice. This inquiry found that the perjury indeed had been committed, and that Lavon had not authorized the operation. Sharett and Levi Eshkol tried to issue a statement that would placate both Lavon and those who had opposed him. Ben-Gurion refused to accept the compromise and viewed it as a divisive play within the Mapai party. Another investigative committee took up the matter and sided with the Cohn inquiry. Ben-Gurion then resigned from his post as defense minister. This led to the expulsion of Lavon from the Histadrut labor union and an early call for new elections which changed the political structure in Israel. The specifics of Operation Susannah were kept secret from the Israeli public at the time of the political upheaval. [ Public debate ] Due to Israel&apos;s strict Military Censorship the details of the affair could not be openly discussed in the media. Despite this, debate did occur but with the use of code words such as the &quot; Senior Officer &quot;, to refer to Gibli, and the &quot; unfortunate business &quot; to refer to the Egyptian operation. { e.g. Teveth, Shabtai (1974) Moshe Dayan. The soldier, the man, the legend. Quartet Books. ISBN 0-7043-1080-5. Pages 265,266. Still used twenty years later. } [ Legacy ] Operation Susannah and the Lavon Affair turned out to be disastrous for Israel in several ways: Israel lost significant standing and credibility in its relations with the United Kingdom and the United States that would take years to repair. (The encyclopedia of the Arab-Israeli conflict: a political, social, and military history. ABC-CLIO, 2008. p. 610) The political aftermath caused considerable political turmoil in Israel that affected the influence of its government. (Beinin, Joel. The dispersion of Egyptian Jewry: culture, politics, and the formation of a modern diaspora, AUC Press. 2005. p. 111) In March 2005, Israel publicly honored the surviving operatives, and President Moshe Katsav presented each with a certificate of appreciation for their efforts on behalf of the state, ending decades of official denial by Israel. { &quot; After half a century of reticence and recrimination, Israel... honored... agents-provocateur. &quot; Reuters, 30th March 2005. Accessed 2nd July 2007. } [ References ] [ Further reading ] [ Ostrovsky Victor Victor Ostrovsky Hoy Claire By way of deception 1991 St. Martin&apos;s Press 978-0-312-92614-4 ] Aviezer Golan, Ninio Marcelle, Victor Levy, Robert Dassa and Philip Natanson (As told to Aviezer Golan) (Translated from Hebrew by Petretz Kidron) (Fwd by Golda Meir ): Operation Susannah, Harper &amp; Row, NYC, 1978 ISBN 978-0-06-011555-5 Joel Beinin : Nazis and Spies The Discourse of Operation Susannah, ch 4 in &apos;&apos;The Dispersion Of Egyptian Jewry Culture, Politics, And The Formation Of A Modern Diaspora&apos;&apos; Berkeley: University of California Press, c1998. Amer Univ in Cairo Pr, 2005, ISBN 978-977-424-890-0 Joel Beinin: Egyptian Jewish Identities. Communitarianisms, nationalisms, nostalgias Stanford Humanities Review, 1996 [ External links ] The Lavon Affair - Israel and Terror in Egypt &apos;&apos;The Lavon Affair&apos;&apos; by Doron Geller, JUICE, The Jewish Agency for Israel, Education Department The Lavon Affair by David Hirst, Excerpts from his book: The Gun and the Olive Branch, 1977, 1984, Futura Publications The Lavon Affair including quotes from Moshe Sharett’s Diary List of books about the Lavon Affair Category:Terrorist incidents in the 1950s Category:Terrorist incidents in 1954 Category:Arab–Israeli conflict Category:Egypt–Israel relations Category:History of Egypt Category:False flag operations Category:Jewish Egyptian history Category:1954 in Israel Category:1954 in Egypt Category:1960 in Israel Category:1960 in Egypt Category:Political scandals in Israel Category:Espionage scandals and incidents Category:Military scandals Category:Secret military programs Category:Zionist terrorism ar:فضيحة لافون cs:Lavonova aféra de:Lavon-Affäre es:Asunto Lavon fa:ماجرای لاون fr:Affaire Lavon id:Peristiwa Lavon he:העסק הביש no:Lavon-affæren pl:Afera Lavona ru:Дело Лавона sv:Lavonaffären