[ Elias Thomas Dykeman Peter Edible Wild Plants New York, NY Sterling Publishing Co., Inc. 1982 58 978-1-4027-6715-9 ] The ostrich fern or shuttlecock fern (Matteuccia struthiopteris) is a crown-forming, colony-forming fern, occurring in temperate regions of the Northern Hemisphere in eastern and northern Europe, northern Asia and northern North America. Osterich Fern Foliage Spore-bearing fertile fronds in early spring It grows from a completely vertical crown, favoring riverbanks and sandbars, but sends out lateral stolon s to form new crowns. It thus can form dense colonies resistant to destruction by floodwaters. The frond s are dimorphic, with the deciduous green sterile fronds being almost vertical, 100–170  cm tall and 20–35  cm broad, long-tapering to the base but short-tapering to the tip, so that they resemble ostrich plumes, hence the name. The fertile fronds are shorter, 40–60  cm long, brown when ripe, with highly modified and constricted leaf tissue curled over the sporangia; they develop in autumn, persist erect over the winter and release the spore s in early spring. Matteuccia species are used as food plants by the larva e of some Lepidoptera species including Sthenopis auratus. [ Cultivation and uses ] The ostrich fern is a popular ornamental plant in garden s. While choosing a place of planting it should be taken into account that these ferns are very expansive and its leaves often lose their beauty throughout the summer, especially if not protected from wind and hail. The tightly wound immature fronds, called fiddleheads, are also used as a cooked vegetable, and are considered a delicacy mainly in rural areas of northeastern North America. [ March 2011 ] The young shoots can also be eaten raw in salads or as a snack in the field. The sprouts are also picked all over Japan, ( &quot; kogomi &quot; in Japanese) [ LaPointe Rick Let us go fiddlehead foragin&apos;, but carefully The Japan Times Tokyo 21 April 2002 http://search.japantimes.co.jp/cgi-bin/fg20020421rl.html 13 March 2011 ] where they are a delicacy. [ Classification ] Matteuccia struthiopteris is the only species in the genus Matteuccia. Some sources include two Asian species, M. orientalis and M. intermedia, but molecular data shows that M. struthiopteris is more closely related to Onocleopsis and Onoclea (sensitive fern) than it is to M. orientalis and M. intermedia, and so the latter should be moved to a genus Pentarhizidium which contains those two species. [ 10.2307/2445820 http://www.amjbot.org/cgi/content/abstract/84/6/840 Molecular systematics and a revised taxonomy of the onocleoid ferns (Dryopteridaceae: Onocleeae) GJ Gastony and MC Ungerer American Journal of Botany 84 6 840–849 1997 ] Formerly classified as a member of the Dryopteridaceae, Matteuccia has been reassigned to the new much smaller family Onocleaceae. &apos;&apos;Matteuccia struthiopteris&apos;&apos;showing shape and size of fronds [ References ] [ Matteuccia struthiopteris ] [ Sources ] Flora of North America: Matteucia struthiopteris Germplasm Resources Information Network: &apos;&apos;Matteuccia struthiopteris&apos;&apos; Hyde, H. A., Wade, A. E., &amp; Harrison, S. G. (1978). Welsh Ferns. National Museum of Wales. Category:Onocleaceae Category:Pteridophyta of Asia Category:Pteridophyta of the Americas Category:Pteridophyta of Europe Category:Ferns of the United States Category:Flora of Northeast Asia Category:Flora of Eastern Canada Category:Native Ferns of Ontario Category:Flora of the Northeastern United States Category:Flora of the Southeastern United States Category:Flora of Appalachia (United States) Category:Flora of Estonia Category:Flora of Ohio Category:Flora of Pennsylvania Category:Leaf vegetables Category:Japanese vegetables Category:Garden plants of Asia Category:Garden plants of Europe Category:Garden plants of North America Category:Fern species cs:Pérovník pštrosí da:Strudsvinge-slægten de:Straußenfarn et:Harilik laanesõnajalg es:Matteuccia struthiopteris eo:Struta filiko fa:سرخس شترمرغ fr:Fougère allemande lt:Paupinis jonpapartis nl:Struisvaren ja:クサソテツ no:Strutseving nn:Strutseveng pl:Pióropusznik strusi ru:Страусник обыкновенный fi:Kotkansiipi sv:Strutbräken