[ DePauw University ] [ 41.923558 N 87.653542 W type:edu title ] [ February 2011 ] [ la Viam sapientiae monstrabo tibi ] {. } { &quot; I will show you the way of wisdom. &quot; } { 1898 } { Private } { Quarter } { Roman Catholic ( } { Vincentian ) } { Big East Conference } { Rev. } { Dennis H. Holtschneider, C.M., Ed.D. } { Chicago } { Illinois } { United States } { Metropolitan, } { Lincoln Park and downtown } { Chicago Loop; four suburban locations } { 16,384 (fall 2011 data) } { 9,014 (1,031 in law) } { 919 full-time, 900 part-time per quarter (fall 2009 data) } { NCAA } { Division I } { Blue Demons } { Royal Blue &amp; Scarlet                       } { DIBS (Demon In a Blue Suit) } { $414 million } { 225px } DePaul University is a private institution of higher education and research in Chicago, Illinois, United States. Founded by the Vincentian s in 1898, the university takes its name from the 17th century French priest Saint Vincent de Paul. The student body consists of about 25,400 students (approximately 16,400 undergraduate and 9,000 graduate/law), making DePaul the largest Roman Catholic university and one of the 10 largest private universities in the United States; it is the largest private university in Illinois. DePaul is a member of the Big East Conference. [ History ] { Chicago Daily News &apos;&apos; } Originally named St. Vincent&apos;s College, DePaul University was founded in 1898 by the Congregation of the Mission priests and brethren, known as the Vincentians. Followers of 17th century French priest Saint Vincent de Paul, they founded the university to serve Roman Catholic children of immigrants. Student enrollment grew from 70 in 1898 to 200 in 1903 in what is now the Lincoln Park neighborhood of Chicago. In that year, James Quigley, Archbishop of Chicago, announced plans to create a preparatory seminary, now Archbishop Quigley Preparatory Seminary, for the archdiocese and allow the Jesuit Saint Ignatius College, now Loyola University Chicago to move its collegiate programs to the north side, threatening St. Vincent College&apos;s survival. In response, the Vincentians re-chartered in 1907 as DePaul University, expressly offering all of its courses of study to men and women of any religious background. DePaul began admitting women in 1911 and awarded degrees to its first female graduates in 1912. It was one of the first Catholic universities to admit female students in a co-educational setting. In 1912, DePaul established the School of Music and the College of Commerce, the latter becoming one of the oldest business schools in the nation. In 1914, the College began offering courses in Chicago&apos;s Loop, the precursor of DePaul&apos;s second primary campus. In 1915, the Illinois College of Law completed its affiliation with the university and became the DePaul University College of Law. Enrollment totaled more than 1,100. With the entry of the United States into World War I in 1918, DePaul formed a unit of the US Army Reserve Officer Training Corps and converted its College Theatre into Army barracks. DePaul University&apos;s basketball team (1908) DePaul University&apos;s baseball team (1908) DePaul University&apos;s football team (1916) Although finances were rocky, the university continued to grow and build in the 1920s. In 1926, the university was first accredited by the North Central Association of Colleges and Universities. When DePaul’s first sports teams were formed in the early 1900s, the monogram &quot; D &quot; was selected for the uniforms. From this originated the nickname &quot; D-men &quot; which evolved into &quot; Demons. &quot; The color blue, which signifies loyalty and was chosen in 1901 by a vote of the student body, was added to the name to create the &quot; Blue Demons &quot;. By 1930 more than 5,000 students were enrolled in eight colleges and schools on two campuses. The Great Depression led to fluctuations in enrollment and tuition as well as cutbacks, including elimination of the football team in 1939. In 1938, the Department of Elementary Education was established, reportedly the only one in the Midwest and one of six in the United States. DePaul mobilized for World War II, offering its facilities for war training and free courses to train people for industry work. The G.I. Bill, which paid the tuition of veterans enrolled in college, turned the financial tide for DePaul. Enrollment in 1945 skyrocketed to 8,857 students, twice as many as the previous year, and totaled more than 11,000 in 1948. Although a consulting firm recommended relocating from its deteriorating Lincoln Park neighborhood to the suburbs, trustees voted to remain and support revitalization of the neighborhood. In 1942, DePaul named Ray Meyer as head basketball coach. Meyer coached for DePaul until he retired in 1984, leading the 1945 team to the championship of the National Invitation Tournament and earning numerous honors, including election to the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame in 1979, the fourth active coach to be so honored. In 1954, DePaul adopted its current armorial seal with coat of arms and motto: &quot; Viam sapientiae monstrabo tibi &quot; ( &quot; I will show you the way of wisdom &quot;, Proverbs, IV, 11). In 1955, the Frank J. Lewis Foundation donated the 18-story Kimball Building, rechristened the Lewis Center, at 25 East Jackson Boulevard, to the university. The building, still used today, was the hub of the Loop campus until 1993, when the DePaul Center opened at 1 East Jackson Boulevard (at State Street). In 1972, DePaul created the School for New Learning, one of the first colleges in the nation dedicated to serving adult students. In 1976 and 1977, the university acquired the land and buildings of the McCormick Theological Seminary, which increased its presence in Lincoln Park. In 1978, DePaul acquired the 47-year-old Goodman School of Drama from the Goodman Theatre and transformed it into The Theatre School. Following renovations in the 1980s and expansion of academic programs to promote research and social engagement, the university launched a six-year strategic plan in 1989. The plan included raising the national profile, expanding enrollment from 13,500 to 18,500 and completing an extensive building campaign at the Loop and Lincoln Park campuses. Major construction included renovation of the DePaul Center in 1993 and acquisition of the Blackstone Theatre, rechristened the Merle Reskin, in 1992. At Lincoln Park, projects included the John T. Richardson Library, completed in 1992, several new residence halls and the quadrangle. In 1994 enrollment was 16,700. Under the next six-year strategic plan, the university expanded enrollment to 23,000 students, reclaiming its status as the nation’s largest Catholic university while maintaining admission standards, increasing diversity (currently, one third of the student population is of color) and maintaining access for first-generation college students and those from low-income circumstances (about one-fourth of incoming freshmen qualify for Pell grants for low-income families). Additional new facilities included the William G. McGowan Biological and Environmental Sciences Center (McGowan North) in 1999, the Ray Meyer Fitness and Recreation Center in 1999, the Student Center in 2001 and the Sullivan Athletic Center in 2000, and the Monsignor Andrew J. McGowan Environmental Science and Chemistry Building (McGowan South) in 2009. A privately owned and operated building, 1237 West, was built one block off campus as a student apartment community for over 580 DePaul University students with retail businesses on the first floor. DePaul was one of seven finalists for “College of the Year” honors given by &apos;&apos;Time&apos;&apos; magazine and the Princeton Review in 1998. DePaul got the #1 ranking for Great College Town by the Princeton Review in 2008. DePaul entered into a merger with Barat College in 2001, from which it withdrew in 2005 after continued low enrollment and rising maintenance costs made the campus unviable. The former Barat College had its final graduation on June 11, 2005 and was closed as of June 30, 2005. It sold the grounds of the 147-year-old college to a condominium developer Barat Woods LLC, who pledged to maintain the historic Old Main building, yet demolished the Thabor Wing with its Italianate style Sacred Heart Chapel. The remaining students, tenured and tenure-track faculty and some staff were absorbed into DePaul&apos;s other campuses. Barat Woods LLC went into foreclosure and the property was auctioned and the lender, Harris Bank won. The former Barat College campus was donated by an anonymous donor to Woodlands Academy of the Sacred Heart. [ Controversies ] Like other universities, DePaul has incurred controversies. In 1967, the Black Student Union (BSU) was formed. In 1969, while in ongoing negotiations with DePaul administrators, members of the group occupied a campus building for two days and led several related rallies. The actions helped bring concerns of black students, and later those of Latino, Muslim and other student groups, to the fore. The university now sponsors a wide range of student organizations, including BSU, the DePaul Conservative Alliance, DePaul Irish Society, the DePaul Alliance for Latino Empowerment, United Muslims Moving Ahead, Hillel, the Asian Cultural Exchange, the Hellenic-American Student Association and the Activist Student Union. In 2005, the university limited fliers protesting a visit of Ward Churchill, which included the term &quot; hatemonger, &quot; declaring them &quot; propaganda &quot;. FIRE.org website Churchill&apos;s visit resulted in a bomb threat that prompted the university to limit attendance at the event. On May 24, 2006, the university sponsored a forum on free speech for students, faculty and interested community members, which featured Randall Kennedy of Harvard Law School and Ann Franke of United Educators in Washington, D.C., and included a discussion between the speakers and members of the audience. Free speech forum at DePaul on 5/24/06 Free speech forum at DePaul on 5/24/06 In June 2007, Norman Finkelstein, an outspoken political science professor, was denied tenure. This followed a highly public and rancorous evaluation process in which an opponent of Finkelstein, Alan Dershowitz, took the highly unorthodox step of sending unsolicited letters and dossiers to Finkelstein&apos;s peers at DePaul urging them to deny him tenure. DePaul&apos;s president, Rev. Dennis Holtschneider, denies that the outside pressure affected the university&apos;s position, saying &quot; This attention was unwelcome and inappropriate and had no impact on either the process or the outcome of this case. &quot; DePaul University Statement on the Tenure and Promotion Decision Concerning Professor Norman Finkelstein 6 June 2007 Finkelstein&apos;s supporters claim he was denied tenure due to his writings on the Holocaust and on the state of the Palestinians under Israeli occupation. The Commonplace Cowardice of Responsible Professors What the Finkelstein Tenure Fight Tells Us About the State of Academia (Robert Jensen, CounterPunch, 25 May 2007) DePaul Genuflects to Dershowitz ( ZNet, 12 June 2007) DePaul denies tenure to controversial professor ( CNN, 11 June 2007). Detractors such as Dershowitz challenged Finkelstein&apos;s research methods and confrontational approach. On September 5, 2007, Finkelstein resigned after he and the university reached a settlement; they released a joint statement. DePaul settlement with Dr. Finkelstein [ Dershowitz-Finkelstein affair ] [ http://www.chicagotribune.com/business/chi-tue-chicago-law-07-28jul28%2C0%2C6099572.story Topic Galleries Chicago Tribune 2011-03-17 ] In June 2009, the university removed the dean of the College of Law, Glen Weissenberger. The recommendation to remove Dean Weissenberger was made by DePaul&apos;s provost, Helmut Epp, who stated in an e-mail to College of Law faculty and staff that &quot; the working relationship between the dean and the administration had deteriorated to the point where it had become difficult to accomplish the college’s work. &quot; What&apos;s Going on at DePaul Law? - Law Blog - WSJ Weissenberger had recently reported to the American Bar Association that DePaul&apos;s administration had failed to redistribute law school tuition income appropriately, in violation of ABA accreditation rules. Some DePaul faculty and students, as well as several independent observers in the law school community, have speculated that Weissenberger&apos;s removal was directly related to his report to the ABA. TaxProf Blog: DePaul Fires Dean in Dispute Over Tuition to be Retained by Law School DePaul Provost Ousts Law Dean Without Consulting Faculty, Plans to Appoint an Outsider as Interim Dean The ABA did not find any irregularities that would affect the school&apos;s accreditation. In recent years, DePaul has been the target of criticism, for different reasons, by various conservative and free speech organizations.The most active of the free speech groups is FIRE. The organization lists DePaul as the second worse college in America for free speech http://www.huffingtonpost.com/greg-lukianoff/the-12-worst-colleges-for_b_814706.html#s230523 &amp; title=SUNY_BinghamtonBinghamton_New. FIRE gave the President of the University, Dennis H. Holtschneider, its award for the worst protector of Free Speech by a university president. FIRE - University presidents battle for honors in spinelessness FIRE and others have criticized the university&apos;s decision to suspend without public hearing and not renew the contract of part-time faculty member Thomas E. Klocek in September 2004 for comments made to and behaviour towards Palestinian students concerning the conflict with Israel. The event resulted in FIRE&apos;s criticism of the university&apos;s level of support for open discussion and debate. FIRE.org website. University supporters maintain that the issue was not Klocek&apos;s views, but the manner in which he expressed them. The conflict happened in the student union and campus security was called. [ Campuses ] Completed in 1992, Richardson Library faces the Quad in the heart of DePaul University&apos;s Lincoln Park Campus. DePaul&apos;s two primary campuses are in the Lincoln Park neighborhood of Chicago and the downtown Loop area. The university has suburban campuses in Naperville, Oak Forest, O&apos;Hare and Rolling Meadows. Lincoln Park CampusDePaul&apos;s Lincoln Park Campus is the oldest and largest of the university&apos;s six campuses. Located on [ 36 acre ha 2 ] in Chicago&apos;s historic Lincoln Park neighborhood, this campus offers a traditional university environment. Approximately 2,400 students live on campus in DePaul&apos;s twelve residence halls. The Lincoln Park Campus is home to the College of Liberal Arts and Social Sciences, the College of Communication, The Theatre School, the School of Music, the College of Education, the College of Science and Health, and the John T. Richardson Library. Opened in 1992, the library features study and small-group spaces, an automated reference center, and a high-tech Resource Center for Career Development. Completed in 2002, the Student Center is a central meeting place for students. Student Center in March 2007. The three-level Student Center, which opened in 2002, houses student services, dining facilities, the Saint Louise de Marillac Chapel, a cyber cafe, a PNC Bank and offices for organizations ranging from special-interest clubs to the Center for Intercultural Programs. Other recent additions include the Sullivan Athletic Center, containing McGrath-Phillips Arena, and the Ray Meyer Fitness and Recreation Center. The Monsignor Andrew J. McGowan Environmental Science and Chemistry Building (McGowan South) is a new four-story building completed in January 2009, it is connected to the William G. McGowan Biological and Environmental Sciences Center (McGowan North). The Lincoln Park campus also contains the remnants of the former McCormick Theological Seminary, these buildings (those remaining) are located east of the elevated tracks. This expansion was completed in the 1970s when McCormick moved its campus to the Hyde Park neighborhood. The McCormick Row Houses along the south side of Fullerton Avenue east of the elevated station, though now privately owned, were originally constructed for the Seminary. Also, until its destruction in 2006, the gothic architecture Hayes-Healy Athletic Center adjacent to the CTA Fullerton &apos;L&apos; Station (similar in design to the still-present Cortelyou Commons next to Wish Field at Cacciatore Stadium) was also part of the Seminary campus. The gymnasium was demolished as part of the renovation/expansion of the Fullerton &apos;L&apos; stop, despite being on the National Register of Historic Places. Loop CampusDePaul&apos;s Loop campus is located in downtown Chicago&apos;s Loop along Jackson Boulevard from State Street to Michigan Avenue. It is close to the stock exchange s, financial district, and the Art Institute of Chicago. The DePaul Center (DPC), an 11-story building fully renovated in 1993 to include modern classrooms, high-tech student services and a business library, is located in the building that formerly housed the A. M. Rothschild &amp; Company Store and the Goldblatt&apos;s Department Store. It is home to the College of Commerce. In November 2000, the Urban Land Institute presented DPC with its Award for Excellence for Rehabilitation. The College of Law is based in the Lewis Center and O&apos;Malley Place at the southwest corner of Wabash and Jackson. Kitty-corner across the street is the College of Computing and Digital Media. In 2008, DePaul purchased the 18-story 14 East Jackson Boulevard Building at State and Jackson, formerly the Lytton Building, across the street from the DePaul Center. The College of Communication, the School for New Learning and the School of Public Service were the first academic tenants of 14 East Jackson Boulevard, now the Richard M. and Maggie C. Daley Building. DePaul partnered with Roosevelt University and Columbia College Chicago to build the University Center of Chicago, an 18-story residence hall two blocks south of DPC housing 1,700 students, which opened in 2004 at the intersection of State and Congress Streets. Robert Morris University later joined and also houses students in the University Center of Chicago. Suburban CampusesDePaul has suburban campuses in Rolling Meadows, O&apos;Hare, Oak Forest and Naperville. The four suburban campuses primarily serve part-time professional student s completing undergraduate and graduate degrees. [ Academics ] [ 132 112 ] DePaul University is a not for profit university.For 2011 and 2012, US News &amp; World Report ranked DePaul in the Top Tier (Tier 1) of national colleges and universities. US News &amp; World Report has twice ranked DePaul undergraduate students #1 in the USA (most recently in 2004) in terms of satisfaction with their college experience. The university&apos;s doctoral programs were ranked # 1 in the USA for small university research programs in the Faculty Scholarly Productivity Index for 2005, produced by the State University of New York at Stony Brook. DePaul emphasizes a primary focus on pedagogy and has been recognized for excellence in experiential and service-based learning. Since 2004, US News &amp; World Report has recognized DePaul as one of the top schools in the nation for service learning in which community-based volunteer work is utilized as an instructional strategy. { 30 August 2010 } The 2005 guidebook Colleges with a Conscience: 81 Great Schools with Outstanding Community Involvement provides a description of outreach activity undertaken by the university. The university has a strong emphasis on recruiting first-generation university students and those from disadvantaged backgrounds while striving for academic rigor. The Princeton Review, in its 2007 survey of the best colleges and universities in the United States, ranked DePaul #1 in the nation in the &quot; Diverse Student Population &quot; category. CIO Magazine, a leading journal for the information technology industry, named DePaul to its list of the nation&apos;s 100 most innovative organizations in information technology. { CIO Magazine } DePaul was recognized for its creation and implementation of a series of online tools that help students better navigate their academic careers. DePaul University has ten colleges and schools. [ Driehaus College of Business ] { Chicago Loop. } DePaul&apos;s College of Commerce was recently renamed the Driehaus College of Business after receiving a $30 million gift from alumnus Richard H. Driehaus. The college is located downtown in the Chicago Loop at 1 East Jackson Boulevard and is one of the ten oldest business school s in the US. [ http://commerce.depaul.edu/ DePaul University College of Commerce 2011-03-17 ] It includes the Kellstadt Graduate School of Business. The full-time faculty of the College consists of approximately 130 members. In 2009, Princeton Review ranked the College of Commerce&apos;s entrepreneurship program #3 (out of 700 programs) in the U.S. among graduate programs and #8 among undergraduate programs. [ http://www.entrepreneur.com/topcolleges Colleges and Business Schools Entrepreneur.com 2011-03-17 ] Entrepreneur magazine has consistently ranked DePaul&apos;s entrepreneurship program one of the best in the US. In 2007, Fortune Small Business magazine named DePaul&apos;s undergraduate program one of the 25 best in the nation for entrepreneurs { Fortune Small Business magazine/CNN } and its graduate program one of the top 10 MBA programs with an entrepreneurial flair. { CNN report on DePaul&apos;s MBA program } Endowed Professors include behavioral finance pioneer Werner DeBondt, the Richard H. Driehaus Professor of Behavioral Finance; James Shilling, the Michael J. Horne Professor of Real Estate; and Harold P. Welsch, the Coleman Professor of Entrepreneurship. In 2010, the undergraduate program in DePaul University&apos;s College of Business was named one of BusinessWeek&apos;s best &apos;Return On Investments&apos; for Private Schools. The undergrad program was ranked 40th overall, making it the second highest ranked business school in Illinois (after UIUC&apos;s College of Business ). [ Meglio Francesca Di http://www.businessweek.com/print/bschools/content/mar2010/bs20100322_689346.htm ROI: Business Schools with Bang for the Buck BusinessWeek 2010-03-22 2011-03-17 ] [ College of Communication ] The DePaul College of Communication enrolls more than 1,100 students pursuing professional or traditional academic courses of study in journalism; public relations and advertising; media studies; radio, television and film; relational, group and organizational communication; and culture and communication. { Communications Department at DePaul } Coursework in the college&apos;s graduate and undergraduate degree programs is supplemented by a range of comprehensive pre-employment training opportunities, including Radio DePaul, The DePaulia, and a top-rated internship program. [ College of Law ] College of Law, Lewis Center. [ DePaul University College of Law ] The DePaul University College of Law, located in the Loop at 25 East Jackson Boulevard, is known for its Intellectual Property and Health Law programs, which have both garnered top 10 placements in the US News and World Report rankings in recent years. [ http://www.superlawyers.com/toplists/lawschools/united-states/2009/ Top Law Schools: 2010 Super Lawyers U.S. Law School Rankings Superlawyers.com 2011-03-17 ] [ http://grad-schools.usnews.rankingsandreviews.com/best-graduate-schools/top-law-schools Top Law Schools (usnews.com) Grad-schools.usnews.rankingsandreviews.com 2011-01-31 2011-03-17 ] Notable faculty include M. Cherif Bassiouni, who was nominated for a Nobel Peace Prize in 1999 for his work on behalf of the International Criminal Court, Alberto Coll, former United States Assistant Secretary of Defense under George H. W. Bush, and Andrea Lyon, director of the Center for Justice in Capital Cases. [ College of Computing and Digital Media ] [ DePaul University College of Computing and Digital Media ] College of Computing and Digital Media. The DePaul University College of Computing and Digital Media (CDM) is also located in the Loop and includes the largest graduate program in the United States. CDM is organized into two schools: the School of Cinema and Interactive Media and the School of Computing. At the 2006 ACM International Collegiate Programming Contest, in which over 5,600 teams representing 1,733 universities from 84 countries competed, DePaul placed 29th, one of three U.S. universities in the top 30 ( MIT placed 7th, Princeton placed 28th). CDM is a recognized national leader in computer network security and information assurance education, according to a designation bestowed by the National Security Agency and the U.S. Department of Homeland Security. DePaul was named as a National Center of Academic Excellence in Information Assurance by the two agencies in early 2005. CDM was one of only six schools nationwide (and the only Midwestern university) selected by Sony Pictures Imageworks to take part in the inaugural Imageworks Professional Academic Excellence (IPAX) program. The program is a collaboration to educate faculty and structure curricula in an effort to develop future artists, designers, animators and engineers who will help the visual effects industry to grow. DePaul&apos;s Digital Cinema program, one of the first of its kind in the nation, combines the artistic principles of film school programs with the technology expertise of digital graphics, visual effects and digital storytelling. In 2005 DePaul became the first Liberal Arts university in the US to offer a Bachelors degree in Computer Games Development, and in 2008 named Eugene Jarvis their first Game Designer in Residence. In 2011, DePaul became the first university in the Midwest to offer an MFA Screenwriting and an MFA Animation. [ College of Liberal Arts &amp; amp; Social Sciences ] The College of Liberal Arts &amp; Social Sciences is DePaul&apos;s largest college and is located in the Lincoln Park Campus, which occupies [ 36 acre ha 2 ] in Chicago&apos;s Lincoln Park community. [ http://condor.depaul.edu/~dpulas DePaul University: College of Liberal Arts and Sciences Graduate Condor.depaul.edu 2011-03-17 ] Notable college faculty members include Aminah McCloud, director of the Islamic World Studies program; Joseph Schwieterman, director of the Chaddick Institute for Metropolitan Development. { Chaddick Institute site } The philosophy department is also noted as a first-rate program in 20th century continental philosophy, particularly at the graduate level, according to the Hartman Report { Hartman Report. } The department includes major Heidegger translators David Farrell Krell and William McNeill, and feminist theorist Tina Chanter. The graduate School of Public Service (SPS), located in the Loop Campus, educates nonprofit and government professionals, includes an interdisciplinary faculty, and offers a number of international programs. { Public Service graduate school at DePaul } It is the largest program of its type in the midwest. The English department offers the Oeuvre Prize to distinguished writers semi-annually to recognize significant accomplishments in Literature. [ School for New Learning ] The School for New Learning (SNL), created in 1972, was one of the first university-wide efforts in the United States to serve adult students through a separate college. { School for New Learning (SNL) at DePaul Univ. } Students partner with faculty and professional mentors to create a unique curriculum for earning an undergraduate or graduate degree and can earn college credit for knowledge gained through life experiences by demonstrating competence in various areas. SNL was named one of six &quot; Best Practice &quot; institutions in North America by the Council for Adult and Experiential Learning, an international non-profit organization which advocates for adult learning. The Houston-based American Productivity and Quality Center has touted SNL for its individualized education of adult students. Associate Professor Miriam Ben-Yoseph was named the 2006 Illinois Professor of the Year by the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching and the Council for Advancement and Support of Education (CASE). The Chronic Illness Initiative in DePaul&apos;s School for New Learning was named one of the 30 &quot; Smart Business Ideas &quot; in higher education by University Business magazine in its December 2007 issue. { http://newsroom.depaul.edu/depaulfactsstats/FactsandStats_2_412_2554.html } All Hallows College in Dublin, Ireland, modeled their program for adult learners after the School for New Learning. { http://newsroom.depaul.edu/NewsReleases/showNews.aspx?NID=2115 } [ College of Education ] The College of Education is recognized for teaching students to be effective in multicultural urban environments. { I } It is engaged in partnerships with more than 150 Chicago-area schools, including the Chicago Public Schools, parochial and private institutions. DePaul&apos;s education program was among the first to become accredited by the National Council for Accreditation of Teacher Education in 1965 and remains accredited today. The school offers undergraduate and graduate degree programs in early childhood, elementary and secondary education and physical education; bilingual/bicultural education; social and cultural foundations in education; curriculum studies; educational leadership; human services and counseling; and a program in language, literacy and specialized instruction. Many of the school&apos;s graduates go on to teach in the Chicago Public Schools, private Catholic schools in the city of Chicago, and public and private schools throughout the metropolitan area. [ School of Music ] DePaul&apos;s School of Music has more than two dozen members of the Chicago Symphony Orchestra and the Lyric Opera of Chicago as faculty. [ http://music.depaul.edu/ DePaul University School of Music 2011-03-17 ] The School of Music was named as one of the &quot; Schools That Rock &quot; in the 2005 Rolling Stone guidebook that evaluated collegiate music schools nationally. In 2007, Fortune Small Business recognized its performing arts management major as one of the 24 best cross-discipline programs for entrepreneurs. { CNN/Money report on DePaul } In addition to degrees in jazz and concert performance, music composition, music education and jazz studies, DePaul has programs in sound recording technology and performing arts management. [ The Theatre School ] DePaul&apos;s Theatre School was founded as the Goodman School of Drama in 1925 and is the Midwest&apos;s oldest theater training conservatory. [ http://theatreschool.depaul.edu/ DePaul University, The Theatre School 2011-03-17 ] In 2006, the school&apos;s array of theatrical productions, playwrighting festivals, guest-lecture series and scholarship availability are featured in the book Creative Colleges, { &apos;&apos;Creative Colleges&apos;&apos; } written by Elaina Loveland. In January 2003, The Education Life section of The New York Times listed DePaul&apos;s Theatre School among nine schools most mentioned by casting directors and theatrical agents for program quality. It was the first in the USA to offer an undergraduate degree in Dramaturgy and Dramatic Criticism. As part of a &quot; learning by doing &quot; philosophy, the school presents more than 40 productions each season in a variety of venues. Ten productions are offered to the public each season as part of The Theatre School Showcase, Chicago Playworks (the city&apos;s oldest continuously operating children&apos;s theater), New Directors Series, or New Playwrights Series. Theater students are involved in all aspects of the productions. [ College of Science and Health ] The College of Science and Health (CSH) was established in 2011 to develop future scientists, engineers, mathematicians, clinicians, researchers and health professionals to meet the demands of the growing fields of science and health. CSH offers multiple undergraduate majors and graduate programs in the areas of biology, chemistry, environmental science, mathematics, nursing, physics and psychology. Courses are primarily offered on the Lincoln Park Campus. Notable professors include psychology professor Leonard A. Jason. { http://psychology.unc.edu/news/Documents/jlclinpsy-top-producers-1.pdf } The community and clinical-community psychology programs won the Award for Excellence in Education Programs from the Society for Community Research and Action (SCRA Division 27 of the American Psychological Association ); DePaul&apos;s program was the first recipient of the award, given for the first time in 2007. [ Continuing and Professional Education ] DePaul&apos;s Continuing and Professional Education division (DePaul CPE) { Continuing and Professional Education Website } provides non-degree-based professional development and adult education courses to individuals and to groups of employees at companies, organizations and governmental agencies. Courses range from three-hour seminars to 180-hour certificate programs and are offered online, on DePaul&apos;s six campuses, and at company sites. Courses and certificates in 20 different topic areas are available, including Financial Planning, Human Resources and Training, Management, Marketing, Communications and Paralegal Studies. { CPE Centers Course Page } DePaul CPE, a separate unit within DePaul, draws on university faculty and professionals from Chicago organizations to teach its courses. { CPE Biographies Page } [ Student life ] [ Athletics ] [ DePaul Blue Demons ] Blue Demon primary logo { Demons&apos; sports logos } DePaul competes in NCAA Division I and is a member of the Big East Conference. The school mascot is the Blue Demons. The school is well known for its men&apos;s basketball program which gained prominence under Ray Meyer who led the team to the NCAA Division I basketball Final Four in the 1978 –1979 season. DePaul also made it to the Final Four in 1943. The school&apos;s only national championship came in 1945 after winning the National Invitation Tournament (NIT). DePaul has been to the NCAA tournament 22 times (two Final Four appearances) and NIT tournament 16 times. The team has played at the Allstate Arena since 1980. DePaul&apos;s mascot is DIBS which stands for Demon In a Blue Suit. DIBS is present at every Blue Demons basketball game and makes frequent appearances at DePaul&apos;s Lincoln Park Campus and charity appearances around the Chicago metropolitan area. [ Blue Demons fight song ] We will gather &apos;Neath your banner, &apos;Neath the scarlet and the blue, While in song we Tell your praises Praises for old DePaul U Let the battle wage and threaten Yours the victory to claim; As we fight beneath your standard: Proud! Exulting in your name. D - E - M - O - N S (repeat first verse and conclude with &quot; D-E-P-A-U-L &quot; ) [ Greek life ] Nearly 1100 members, 26 chapters total and 11 philanthropy-based groups make up the community. There are 9 male fraternities, 13 female sororities, and 1 co-educational. The largest fraternity on campus has 75 members and the largest sorority has 110 members. 11 organizations are identified as being culturally-based: 6 organizations are Latino interest based, 4 organizations are Historically Black Greek Letter Organizations, and 2 are Asian interest based. 8% of full-time enrolled DePaul undergrads are in a fraternity or sorority. There are no traditional fraternity or sorority houses at DePaul. Fraternities and sororities are listed in random order. [ Interfraternity Council ] Pi Kappa Alpha (PIKE) Phi Kappa Psi Sigma Alpha Epsilon Alpha Epsilon Pi Sigma Phi Epsilon Delta Tau Delta Phi Gamma Delta Colony (FIJI) [ Multicultural Greek Council ] Alpha Phi Alpha Sigma Lambda Beta Sigma Lambda Gamma Delta Phi Lambda Alpha Phi Gamma Alpha Psi Lambda Lambda Theta Alpha Gamma Phi Omega Sigma Gamma Rho Delta Sigma Theta Kappa Alpha Psi [ Panhellenic Council ] Alpha Omicron Pi Alpha Phi Alpha Sigma Alpha Alpha Xi Delta Chi Omega Delta Gamma Delta Zeta [ Notable alumni ] [ August 2011 ] [ DePaul University Alumni ] [ Business leaders ] Richard Driehaus, CEO, Driehaus Capital Management Jack Greenberg, former CEO, McDonald&apos;s Corporation James M. Jenness, CEO, Kellogg Company Frank Recchia, VP Finance, McGraw-Hill Higher Education Curtis J. Crawford, CEO, XCEO, Inc. Edward J. Joyce, President and COO, Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE) Greg Silich, Entrepreneur, former Leo Burnett CFO Laura Thrall, President and Chief Executive Officer, United Way of Metropolitan Chicago, Inc Bertram L. Scott, President, U.S. Commercial, CIGNA Peggy Troy, President and CEO, Children’s Hospital and Health System Frank M.Clark, Chairman and CEO, ComEd Jeffrey S.Aronin, President and CEO, Ovation Pharmaceuticals Brooks Boyer, Senior Vice President, Marketing, Chicago White Sox Leticia Peralta Davis, CEO, Metropolitan Pier and Exposition Authority Martin Jahn, General Director, Volkswagen Group RUS Sister Catherine Ryan, CEO, Maryville Academy Daniel Ustian, Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer, Navistar International Corp. Thomas Briatico, President of Maytag Corporation Robert E. Goldberg, Former Chairman, Chicago Board of Trade Victor Faraci, Former Senior VP Marketing, Warner Bros. Kerrie L. Holley, Chief Architect of IBM Global Services and IBM Distinguished Engineer; IBM Black Engineer of the Year Award Recipient 2003 John W. Martin, Jr., Former Vice President and General Counsel Ford Motor Co. William W. Moreton, President and CFO, Potbelly Sandwich Works Diane M. Pearse, CFO, Crate and Barrel Peter Pesce, Executive Vice President, Fifth Third Bank Richard Rosenfield, Co-Chairman, California Pizza Kitchen William M. Rudolphsen, Senior Vice President and CFO, Walgreens Co. Daniel Ustian, CEO and President, Navistar International Corp. Ernest R. Wish, Chairman of Wish Enterprises; Former Managing Partner, Coopers &amp; Lybrand Kathleen M. Waltz, President and CEO, Orlando Sentinel Communications Daniel Krajnovich, CEO, United Healthcare of Indiana Margaret G. McDermott, Executive Vice president and CEO, Saints Mary and Elizabeth Medical Center, Chicago Carol L. Schneider, President and CEO, Advocate Christ Medical Center, Advocate Hope Children&apos;s Hospital, Oak Lawn Donna Thompson, CEO, Access Community Health Network Dan Evans, Former Vice President and General Manager, Los Angeles Dodgers George Vukotich, Dean, Concordia University College of Business Anthony J. Andrukaitis, Director, Kelso Technologies Inc Patricia J. Parson, Founder and former CEO, AmerInd, Inc Anne Pramaggiore, President and COO, ComEd Tom D, President and CEO, YouAreMighty Albert Nader, Founder and President, Questar Entertainment [ Politicians, government officials and civic leaders ] Frank Annunzio, U.S. Representative from Illinois (1965–1993) Michael A. Bilandic, past Mayor of Chicago Anne M. Burke, Illinois Supreme Court Justice, 1st District Joseph Burke, judge of the Illinois Appellate Court (1939–76) Richard M. Daley, former Mayor of Chicago Richard J. Daley, former Mayor of Chicago Terrance Gainer, Sergeant at Arms of the United States Senate Benjamin Hooks, former Executive Director of the NAACP Laura Spurr, Chairwoman of the Nottawaseppi Huron Band of Potawatomi (2000–2001, 2003–2010)[1] Samuel Skinner, former Chief Federal Prosecutor, U.S. Secretary of Transportation; Chief of Staff to President George H. W. Bush Charles E. Tucker, Jr., U.S. Air National Guard Brigadier General Dorothy Brown, Clerk, Cook County Circuit Court [ Athletes and sports figures ] Mark Aguirre, Forward, NBA 1982 - 1994 (Dallas, Detroit) Bill Boedeker, Halfback, NFL 1946-1950 (4 different teams) Andre Brown, Forward, NBA 2007–present (currently with Bandırma Banvit of Turkey) Latasha Byears, women&apos;s basketball player in the WNBA Wilson Chandler, Forward, NBA 2007–present (currently with Denver Nuggets) Dallas Comegys, Forward, NBA 1987-1989 (New Jersey, San Antonio) Tyrone Corbin, Forward, NBA 1985 - 2000 (9 different teams) Dave Corzine, Center, NBA 1978 - 1990 (5 different teams) Terry Cummings, Forward, NBA 1982 - 2000 (7 different teams) Kevin Edwards, Guard, NBA 1988 - 2000 (4 different teams) Elene Gedevanishvili, Georgian figure skater Stephen Howard, Forward, NBA 1992-1998 (3 different teams) Steven Hunter, Center, NBA 2000–present (currently with Memphis Grizzlies) George Mikan, one of the NBA&apos;s 50 greatest players Quentin Richardson, Guard, NBA 2000–present (currently with Orlando Magic) Bobby Simmons, Guard, NBA 2001–present (currently with San Antonio Spurs) Rod Strickland, Guard, NBA 1988 - 2005 (9 different teams) [ Authors ] William Granger, Chicago Tribune and Chicago Sun-Times columnist; author of The November Man series of novels. James Conroyd Martin is the author of Push not the River and its sequel, Against a Crimson Sky. Sean Stephenson, author of Get Off Your &quot; But &quot; Thomas Moore (spiritual writer), author of Care of the Soul Richard Peck, author of A Year Down Yonder [ Musicians ] Pete Wentz, bassist for Fall Out Boy (dropped out one quarter, or 10 weeks, shy of graduation to pursue music career) Jeremy Barnes, drummer of indie rock bands Neutral Milk Hotel, Bright Eyes Richard Harper, drummer of the Chicago-based rock groups Plastics Hi-Fi, The Sam Saunders Machine, and Team Band Several members of the rock band Chicago, founded in 1967 Frank Catalano, jazz musician Ryan Cohan, jazz musician Brian Culbertson, jazz musician Greg Davis, musician, sound-artist James William Guercio, producer for Chicago (band) and former owner of Country Music Television Ramsey Lewis, jazz musician Abraham Lubin, Hazzan Ray Manzarek, keyboardist for 1960&apos;s rock band The Doors Kris Myers, drummer of the Chicago-based progressive rock group Umphrey&apos;s McGee Tim Nordwind, bass and vocals for the band Ok Go Jim O&apos;Rourke, Grammy Award-winning producer, composer, musician, sound-artist Walter Parazaider, woodwind player, Chicago (band) James Pankow, trombone player, Chicago (band) George Perle, Pulitzer Prize-winning composer James Quinn, Emmy Award-winning composer Tristen Gaspadarek, acclaimed singer/songwriter, performance artist [ Film, theater and media personalities ] Tom Amandes Gillian Anderson Kevin Anderson David-Matthew Barnes Tom Bosley Jeffrey Nicholas Brown W. Earl Brown Julianne Buescher Paula Cale Monique Coleman Paul Dinello Judy Greer Sean Gunn Zach Helm Linda Hunt Stana Katic Harvey Korman Joe Mantegna Jane McNeill Paul Miller Michael Muhney Tom O&apos;Horgan Zak Orth Betsy Palmer Elizabeth Perkins ( Hollywood Oscar winner actor Karl Malden was also a graduate of DePaul) John C. Reilly Leonard Roberts Michael Rooker Kevin Scholla Todd Zuniga P.J. Byrne [ See also ] DePaul University College of Computing and Digital Media Kellstadt Graduate School of Business DePaul University College of Law [ References ] [ 30em ] [ External links ] [ DePaul University ] DePaul University Official Website DePaul Blue Demons Official Athletics Website Category:Educational institutions established in 1898 Category:Universities and colleges in Chicago, Illinois Category:Roman Catholic universities and colleges in the United States Category:Big East Conference schools Category:Council of Independent Colleges Category:National Association of Independent Colleges and Universities members Category:North Central Association of Colleges and Schools Category:Universities and colleges in DuPage County, Illinois de:DePaul University es:Universidad DePaul fa:دانشگاه دوپال fr:Université DePaul it:DePaul University no:DePaul University oc:DePaul University ru:Университет Де Поля simple:DePaul University fi:DePaulin yliopisto th:มหาวิทยาลัยเดอโปล zh:帝博大學