[ July 2011 ] Video of Mehndi Application Mehndi applied on a palm. { Rishikesh, } { India. } Mehndi is the application of henna as a temporary form of skin decoration in India, Pakistan and Bangladesh as well as by expatriate communities from those countries. The word mehndi is derived from the Sanskrit word mendhikā. { A dictionary of Urdu, classical Hindi, and English. Dsal.uchicago.edu. Retrieved on 2011-09-26. } The use of mehndi and turmeric is described in the earliest Vedic ritual books. Haldi(Staining oneself with turmeric paste) as well as mehndi are Vedic customs, intended to be a symbolic representation of the outer and the inner sun. Vedic customs are centered around the idea of &quot; awakening the inner light &quot;. Traditional mehndi designs are of representations of the sun on the palm, which, in this context, is intended to represent the mind. Mehndi decorations became fashionable in the West in the late 1990s, where they are sometimes called henna tattoos. Henna is typically applied during special occasions like wedding s and Muslim Festivals such as Eid-ul-Fitr and Eid-ul-Azha. Similarly in Hindu festivals like Karva Chauth, Diwali, Bhaidooj and Teej. In some Hindu festivals, many women have Henna applied to their hands and feet. It is usually drawn on the palms and feet, where the design will be clearest because the skin on these surfaces naturally contains less of the pigment, melanin. Henna was originally used as a form of decoration mainly for brides. In the modern age, usually people buy readymade Henna cones, which are ready to use and make painting easy. However, in rural areas in India, women grind fresh henna leaves on sil (grinding stone) with added oil, which though not as refined as professionally prepared henna cones, brings much darker colors. The term henna tattoo is figurative, because true tattoo s are permanent surgical insertions of pigment s underneath the skin, as opposed to pigments resting on the surface as is the case with mehndi. Likely due to the desire for a &quot; tattoo-black &quot; appearance, many people have started adding the synthetic dye p-Phenylenediamine (PPD) to henna to give it a black colour. PPD is extremely harmful to the skin and can cause severe allergic reactions resulting in permanent injury or death. { Warnings: PPD Black Henna: Para-phenylenediamine &quot; Black Henna &quot; can harm you. The Henna Page } Alata (Mahur) is a flower-based dye used to paint the feet of the brides in some regions of India. It is still used in Bengal. [ December 2010 ] [ Tradition ] [ December 2011 ] Mehandi decoration of palms and feet of a bride Mehndi is a ceremonial art form which originated in ancient India. Muslims also use it as an up coming of age.Intricate patterns of mehndi are typically applied to bride s before wedding ceremonies. The bridegroom is also painted in some parts of India. In Rajasthan, the grooms are given designs that are often as elaborate as those for brides. In Assam, apart from marriage, it is broadly used by unmarried women during Rongali bihu, but there are no restrictions on its use by married women. Henna is also common in some gulf states, specially Yemen, where the night before the wedding night is dedicated to decorating the bride with henna, and called &quot; Henna night &quot;. Some Muslims also use henna as a dye for their hair and for the beards of males - intended to follow the presumed tradition of their prophet, Muhammad, who is said to have used turmeric dye in his beard. It&apos;s considered a &quot; sunnah &quot; and akin to something fortunate/good. In one narration by him, he encouraged Muslim women to dye their nails with henna so their hands could be distinguished from the hands of a male. [ December 2011 ] In the Middle East and Africa, it is common for women to apply henna to their fingernails and toenails and to their hands. In Africa, henna was used as part of spiritual practices by tribes to decorate their bodies and for protective purposes when certain symbols/designs were incorporated. In Somalia, henna is applied to women and girls during Eid, weddings, and visits to important people or relatives. [ December 2011 ] In most countries, henna is seen as a way for women to beautify themselves (as jewels), so is well decorated and applied with good care. [ December 2011 ] [ Process ] left Henna paste is usually applied on the skin using a plastic cone or a paint brush, but sometimes a small metal-tipped jacquard bottle used for silk painting (a jac bottle) is employed. After about 15–20 minutes, the mud will dry and begin to crack, and during this time, a mixture of lemon juice and white sugar can be applied over the henna design to remoisten the henna mud so that the henna still stain darker. The painted area is then wrapped with tissue, plastic, or medical tape to lock in body heat, creating a more intense colour on the skin. The wrap is worn three to six hours, or sometimes overnight and then removed. When first removed, the henna design is pale to dark orange in colour and gradually darkens through oxidation, over the course of 24 to 72 hours. The final color is reddish brown and can last anywhere from one to three weeks depending on the quality and type of henna paste applied, as well as where it was applied on the body (thicker skin stains darker and longer than thin skin). Moisturizing with natural oils, such as olive, sesame seed, or coconut, will also help extend the lifetime of the stain, as skin exfoliation is what causes the henna tattoo to fade. [ Mehndi celebration ] Weddings in India can often be long, ritualistic, and elaborate affairs with many pre-wedding, wedding and post wedding ceremonies. The occasion of Mehndi ceremony is often one of the most important pre-wedding rituals especially for the bride. It is a fun filled ritual, which is celebrated mainly by the bride&apos;s family. Different regions of the country celebrate the ritual in a different way according to their own marriage customs, rituals, and culture. Mehndi ceremonies take place outside India amongst the Indian community and places like Birmingham in the UK are such known hotspots for lavish Mehndi celebrations. The ceremony is mainly held at the bride&apos;s house or at a banquet hall on the eve of the marriage ceremony or few days before the marriage. Generally the bride and groom attend the event together and on the occasion a professional henna artist or a relative applies mehndi to the bride&apos;s hands and feet. The designs are very intricate. Often hidden within the mehndi pattern the name or initials of the groom are applied. The event generally has a celebratory festival feel to it with the women dancing and singing traditional songs and the girls wearing vivid colors such as hot pink and yellow, often if the bride to be wishes to tease her future groom she will make him wear purple. The groom usually wears jutti instead of western footwear. [ Gallery ] Sudanese woman&apos;s hands with mehndi Indian bride&apos;s hands with mehndi Mehndi design Applying Mehndi [ See also ] [ Mehndi ] Henna Alta Body painting Temporary tattoo [ References ] Category:Body art Category:Indian culture Category:Hindu wedding rituals Category:Arts in India Category:Genres of Indian art as:জেতুকা de:Mehndi fa:حنا گذاشتن fr:Mehndī hi:मेहंदी it:Mehndi he:חינה hu:Mehndi ne:मेहंदी pl:Mehendi ru:Менди zh:曼海蒂