{ Basalt breccia, green } { groundmass is composed of } { epidote. } Upper Triassic breccia from York County, Pennsylvania. { Titus Canyon Narrows } Tertiary breccia at Resting Springs Pass, Mojave Desert, California. Breccia ( [ icon ˈ b r ɛ tʃ i ə ] or [ ˈ b r ɛ ʃ i ə ]; [ breach ] ) is a rock composed of broken fragments of minerals or rock cemented together by a fine-grained matrix, { Glossary of Meteoritical Terms. Meteorlab.com. Retrieved on 2011-06-22. } that can be either similar to or different from the composition of the fragments. The word is a loan from Italian, and in that language indicates either loose gravel or stone made by cemented gravel. A breccia may have a variety of different origins, as indicated by the named types including sedimentary breccia, tectonic breccia, igneous breccia, impact breccia and hydrothermal breccia. [ Types ] [ Sedimentary ] Sedimentary breccias are a type of clastic sedimentary rock which are composed of angular to subangular, randomly oriented clasts of other sedimentary rocks. They are formed by either submarine debris flow s, avalanches, mud flow or mass flow in an aqueous medium. Technically, turbidite s are a form of debris flow deposit and are a fine-grained peripheral deposit to a sedimentary breccia flow. The other derivation of sedimentary breccia is as angular, poorly sorted, immature fragments of rocks in a finer grained groundmass which are produced by mass wasting. These are, in essence, lithified colluvium. Thick sequences of sedimentary (colluvial) breccias are generally formed next to fault scarps in graben s. In the field, it may at times be difficult to distinguish between a debris flow sedimentary breccia and a colluvial breccia, especially if one is working entirely from drilling information. Sedimentary breccias are an integral host rock for many SEDEX ore deposits. Sedimentary breccias can be described as rudaceous. A conglomerate, by contrast, is a sedimentary rock composed of rounded fragments or clasts of pre-existing rocks. Both breccias and conglomerates are composed of fragments averaging greater than [ 2 mm in ] in size. The angular shape of the fragments indicates that the material has not been transported far from its source. Breccias indicate accumulation in a juvenile stream channel or accumulations because of gravity erosion. Talus slopes might become buried and the talus cemented in a similar manner. [ Collapse ] A collapse breccia forms where there has been a collapse of rock, typically in a karst landscape. Collapse breccias form blankets in highly weathered regolith due to the removal of rock components by dissolution. [ Tectonic ] Tectonic breccias form where two tectonic plate s create a crumbling of the interface, by their relative movements. [ Fault ] Fault breccias result from the grinding action of two fault blocks, as they slide past each other. Subsequent cementation of these broken fragments may occur by means of mineral matter introduced by groundwater. [ Igneous ] Igneous clastic (detrital) rocks can be divided into two classes: Broken, fragmental rocks associated with volcanic eruptions, both of lava and pyroclastic type; Broken, fragmental rocks produced by intrusive processes, usually associated with plutons or porphyry stocks. [ Volcanic ] Volcanic pyroclastic rocks are formed by explosive eruption of lava and any rocks which are entrained within the eruptive column. This may include rocks plucked off the wall of the magma conduit, or physically picked up by the ensuing pyroclastic surge. Lava s, especially rhyolite and dacite flows, tend to form clastic volcanic rocks by a process known as autobrecciation. This occurs when the thick, nearly solid lava breaks up into blocks and these blocks are then reincorporated into the lava flow again and mixed in with the remaining liquid magma. The resulting breccia is uniform in rock type and chemical composition. Lavas may also pick up rock fragments, especially if flowing over unconsolidated rubble on the flanks of a volcano, and these form volcanic breccias, also called pillow breccias. The volcanic breccia environment is transitional into the pluton ic breccia environment in the volcanic conduits of explosive volcanoes, where lava tends to solidify and may be repeatedly shattered by ensuing eruptions. This is typical of volcanic caldera settings. [ Intrusive ] Clastic rocks are also commonly found in shallow subvolcanic intrusion s such as porphyry stocks, granite s and kimberlite pipes, where they are transitional with volcanic breccias. [ 10.2113/gsecongeo.69.3.412 Origin of breccia pipes American Journal of Science 69 412–413 1974 Mitcham T. W. 3 ] Intrusive rocks can become brecciated in appearance by multiple stages of intrusion, especially if fresh magma is intruded into partly consolidated or solidified magma. This may be seen in many granite intrusions where later aplite veins form a late-stage stockwork through earlier phases of the granite mass. When particularly intense, the rock may appear as a chaotic breccia. Clastic rocks in mafic and ultramafic intrusions have been found and form via several processes: consumption and melt-mingling with wall rocks, where the felsic wall rocks are softened and gradually invaded by the hotter ultramafic intrusion (termed taxitic texture by Russian geologists) Accumulation of rocks which fall through the magma chamber from the roof, forming chaotic remnants Autobrecciation of partly consolidated cumulate by fresh magma injections or by violent disturbances within the magma chamber (e.g. postulated earthquake s ) Accumulation of xenolith s within a feeder conduit or vent conduit. [ Impact ] { Alamo bolide impact breccia (Late } { Devonian, Frasnian) near Hancock Summit, } { Pahranagat Range, Nevada. } Impact breccias are thought to be diagnostic of an impact event such as an asteroid or comet striking the Earth, and are usually found at impact crater s. Impact breccia, a type of impactite, forms during the process of impact crater ing when large meteorite s or comet s impact with the Earth or other rocky planet s or asteroid s. Breccia of this type may be present on or beneath the floor of the crater, in the rim, or in the ejecta expelled beyond the crater. Impact breccia may be identified by its occurrence in or around a known impact crater, and/or an association with other products of impact cratering such as shatter cone s, impact glass, shocked minerals, and chemical and isotopic evidence of contamination with extraterrestrial material (e.g. iridium and osmium anomalies). [ Hydrothermal ] { Hydrothermal breccia, Cloghleagh Iron Mine, near Blessington in Ireland, composed mainly of } { quartz and } { manganese oxides, the result of } { seismic activity about 12 million years ago. } [ Ore_genesis#Hydrothermal_processes ] Hydrothermal breccias usually form at shallow crustal levels ( &lt; 1  km) between 150 to 350 o C, when seismic activity (an earthquake ) causes a void to open along a fault deep underground. The void draws in hot water and as pressure in the cavity drops, the water violently boils – akin to an underground geyser. In addition, the sudden opening of a cavity causes rock at sides of the fault to destabilise and implode inwards, the broken rock gets caught up in a churning mixture of rock, steam and boiling water. Rock fragments hit each other and sides of the fault, and attrition quickly rounds angular breccia fragments. Volatile gases are lost to the steam phase as boiling continues, in particular CO 2. As a result, the chemistry of the fluid s change and ore minerals rapidly precipitate. Breccia-hosted ore deposits are ubiquitous. [ 10.1016/S0169-1368(97)00009-7 Michel Jébrak Hydrothermal breccias in vein-type ore deposits: A review of mechanisms, morphology and size distribution Ore Geology Reviews 12 111–134 1997 3 ] { dolomite with a little translucent quartz. Dark gray is } { jasperoid and } { ore mineral s. Veinlet along lower edge of specimen contains } { sphalerite in carbonates. Pend Oreille mine, } { Pend Oreille County, Washington. } The morphology of breccias associated with ore deposits varies from tabular sheeted veins and clastic dike s associated with overpressured sedimentary strata, to large-scale intrusive diatreme breccias ( breccia pipe s ), or even some synsedimentary diatremes formed solely by the overpressure of pore fluid within sedimentary basin s. Hydrothermal breccias are usually formed by hydrofracturing of rocks by highly pressured hydrothermal fluids. They are typical of the epithermal ore environment and are intimately associated with intrusive-related ore deposits such as skarn s, greisen s and porphyry -related mineralisation. Epithermal deposits are mined for copper, silver and gold. In the mesothermal regime, at much greater depths, fluids under lithostatic pressure can be released during seismic activity associated with mountain building. The pressurised fluids ascend towards shallower crustal levels that are under lower hydrostatic pressure. On their journey, high-pressure fluids crack rock by hydrofracturing, forming an angular jigsaw breccia. Rounding of rock fragments less common in the mesothermal regime, as the formational event is brief. If boiling occurs, methane and hydrogen sulfide may be lost to the steam phase and ore may precipitate. Mesothermal deposits are often mined for gold. [ Ornamental uses ] { skyline or even trees, and were used as } { inlay s for furniture etc., especially in Italy. } The striking visual appearance of breccias has for millennia made them a popular sculptural and architectural material. Breccia was employed for column bases in the Minoan palace of Knossos on Crete in about 1800 BC. { C. Michael Hogan, &apos;&apos;Knossos fieldnotes&apos;&apos;, Modern Antiquarian (2007) } Breccia was used on a limited scale by the ancient Egypt ians  — one of the best-known examples is the statue of the goddess Tawaret in the British Museum. It was regarded by the Romans as an especially precious stone and was often used in high-profile public buildings. Many types of marble are brecciated, such as Breccia Oniciata or Breche Nouvelle. { Ancient Egypt ian goddess } { Tawaret. } It is most often used as an ornamental or facing material in walls and columns. A particularly striking example can be seen in the Pantheon in Rome, which features two gigantic columns of pavonazzetto, a breccia coming from Phrygia (in modern Turkey ). Pavonazzetto obtains its name from its extremely colourful appearance, which is reminiscent of a peacock &apos;s feathers (pavone is &quot; peacock &quot; in Italian ). [ See also ] Fault breccia Impact crater Hydrothermal circulation Vein (geology) Diatreme Kimberlite Regolith [ References ] [ Further reading ] [ Sibson R.H. Earthquake rupturing as a mineralizing agent in hydrothermal systems Geology 15 701–704 1987 10.1130/0091-7613(1987)15 &lt; 701:ERAAMA &gt; 2.0.CO;2 0091-7613 8 ] [ Sibson R.H. Fluid involvement in normal faulting Journal of Geodynamics 29 469–499 2000 10.1016/S0264-3707(99)00042-3 3–5 ] Category:Rocks Category:Tectonics Category:Breccias Category:Igneous rocks Category:Sedimentary rocks Category:Metamorphic rocks Category:Economic geology Category:Petrology Category:Impact event minerals ar:صخر مدملك ca:Bretxa cs:Brekcie cy:Brecia de:Brekzie et:Bretša es:Brecha eu:Bretxa (geologia) fr:Brèche (roche) ko:각력암 io:Brechio it:Rocce sedimentarie clastiche#Brecce ka:ბრექჩია kk:Женттас lt:Brekčija hu:Törmelékkő nl:Breccie ja:礫岩#角礫岩 no:Breksje nn:Breksje pl:Brekcja pt:Brecha ro:Brecie ru:Брекчия sk:Brekcia sl:Breča sr:Бреча fi:Breksia sv:Breccia uk:Брекчія zh:角砾岩 simple:Breccia