[ Lock Haven University of Pennsylvania Public, state-funded Lockhaven University logo.png 250 px 7.5 million 1870 Dr. Michael Fiorentino, Jr. Dr. David White (Interim) Linda D. Koch Lock Haven Pennsylvania United States 5,500 286 Bald Eagle ] Lock Haven University of Pennsylvania, commonly abbreviated LHU, is a state university in Lock Haven, in central Pennsylvania, United States located along the Susquehanna River, and is roughly [ 30 mi km 0 ] from the major towns of Williamsport and State College. Lock Haven University is one of the fourteen members of the Pennsylvania State System of Higher Education. The main campus consists of [ 200 acre ], and the branch campus covers [ 12.9 acre ]. { LHU Campus Map. } It enrolls approximately 5,500 students, including 500  students at a branch campus in Clearfield, Pennsylvania. It offers 69 undergraduate programs and 4  graduate programs. [ History ] LHU was founded in 1870 as the Central State Normal School. By 1927 it was known as the State Teacher&apos;s College in Lock Haven and in 1960 the name was changed to Lock Haven State College. In 1983, the school joined the Pennsylvania State System of Higher Education and became known as Lock Haven University of Pennsylvania. The Clearfield campus in Clearfield, Pennsylvania was established in 1989. LHU&apos;s previous president Craig Dean Willis retired from Lock Haven in 2004 and nearly immediately began an interim presidency at Eastern Michigan University. The vacancy left by Willis was promptly filled by Keith T. Miller, a graduate of the University of Arizona. Upon Miller&apos;s departure, Barbara Dixon, former president of Truman State University was appointed Interim President in 2010. { http://www.passhe.edu/executive/systemrelations/Communications/media/Pages/nrd.aspx?q=434 } [ Campus ] The campus covers [ 200 acre ] on the western side of the city of Lock Haven. The university owns another [ 12.9 acre ha ] at the LHU Clearfield Campus and [ 44 acre ha ] at the Sieg Conference Center. { http://www.lhup.edu/campus/index.htm } University property also includes a new East Campus in the former Lock Haven High School building. { http://www.lhup.edu/campus/east.htm } [ Residence halls ] LHU has seven traditional residence halls and one apartment building. Gross Hall High Hall McEntire Hall North Hall Smith Hall Woolridge Hall Russell Hall Completed in 1973 1970 1969 1967 1960 1964 Houses 192 students 203 400 208 248 205 Now has students [ Campus Village ] An apartment-like setting, offering more independence to older students. Campus Village is generally reserved for FLS and international exchange students { http://www.lhup.edu/campus/village.htm } but any student can apply to live in Campus Village. [ Academic buildings ] Carillon on campus [ Raub Hall ] Completed in 1964. This building houses the Departments of History, Political Science, Economics and Management, English and Foreign Languages. It also offers a computer assisted teaching classroom, a developmental writing laboratory, a computer lab and classrooms. [ Durrwachter Alumni Center ] Completed in 2007, the Durrwachter Center houses the office of admissions, alumni affairs and the board of trustees. The Foundation offices are also located in the Durrwachter Alumni Conference Center. This area coordinates and manages philanthropic activities that support the university. Located in the Durrwachter Alumni Conference Center, Alumni Affairs provides programs and services for over 25,000 graduates, which support the philanthropic goals and mission of Lock Haven University. [ Robinson Hall (Learning Resource Center) ] Completed in 1981. This building houses the Departments of Early Childhood, Elementary, Secondary and Special Education, Psychology, Mathematics, Communications Media and Philosophy. Other features include the Hamblin International Hall of Flags Auditorium, a full production television studio and radio station, a Math Lab and tutoring center devoted to remediation and placement testing, and classrooms. { http://www.lhup.edu/campus/robinson.htm } [ Akeley Hall ] Completed in 1930 and one of the oldest building on campus. It was originally constructed as a laboratory school but now houses the Computer Science, Accounting and Management Department as well as many computer labs. { http://www.lhup.edu/campus/akeley.htm } [ Ulmer Hall ] The main building, renovated in 1996, was constructed in 1952 and contains laboratories for the natural and earth sciences and classrooms. A building addition in 1969 added a greenhouse, planetarium, additional classrooms, laboratories and research facilities. [ Sloan Fine Arts Center ] Completed in 1973, the building contains classrooms, faculty offices, both a small and large theatre forstudent and professional performances and lectures, and a gallery which hosts six exhibitions throughout the year. The Departments of Fine Arts, the Department of communications, and Performing Arts are located here. The theatre hosts a number of performances that are open to both the student body and community. Room 321 is home to the Countdown Theater. Here student directed one-act plays and other short performances expand the role of the theater department and provide students with additional learning experiences. [ East Campus ] Lock Haven University acquired the old Lock Haven High School in 2004, since then significant remodeling has been underway. Projected plans will invest over 40 million dollars into the building in efforts to make it a state-of-the-art science facility. The building will have a major focus in high technology such as nanotechnology and will house a &quot; clean room. &quot; It will become the main building focused on STEM education. STEM stands for Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics. Eventual plans hope to create greenhouses on the top of the building as well as installation of a new planetarium. [ Administrative buildings ] Russell Hall [ Sullivan Hall ] Originally constructed as a library in 1938, this building is now the University administration building. The three-story structure houses The Office of the President, Offices for the Vice President for Academic Affairs and Provost, Vice President of Student Affairs, and the Vice President for Finance, Administration, and Technology, Housing, Social Equity, Cultural Diversity, Institutional Research, and Planning and AssessmentThe Linda J. Emanuel Teaching and Learning Center. [ Russell Hall ] Russell Hall was originally constructed as a residence hall and was the last single-sex residence hall on campus, housing women only until it was renovated to house administrative offices. With higher enrollment Russell Hall once again houses students, however it is no longer a single sex dorm. The first floor houses the Bursar, Financial Aid, Tutoring, Counseling, and Registration offices. The second and third floors now house students. { http://www.lhup.edu/housing/Residence%20Hall%20Information/Russell%20Hall/Russell%20Hall.htm } [ Stevenson Library ] Lock Haven University and its library began in 1870 as the Central State Normal School. All classrooms, dormitories, the dining room, the library, and the auxiliary rooms were housed in the original Sullivan Hall, located approximately where North Hall stands. During the night of December 9, 1888, the entire structure burned to the ground. For the next 16  years, the library needs were met by reading rooms provided by two campus literary societies, The Price Literary Society and the Shakespeare Society. The main entrance to Stevenson Library In 1904, the library was reorganized. Caroline R. Flickinger was the first librarian. Since that time there has been a steady growth in the number and type of library materials and services. This growth has taken the library through two previous buildings into this structure. The present building was designed to be flexible enough to provide for current needs and to allow future development. Currently, an online public access catalog and an automated circulation system are in place. This online catalog is available on the campus network. The library is named for a citizen of Lock Haven, George B. Stevenson (1889 –1965). He served for many years as a Pennsylvania State Senator. After he retired, he was appointed the librarian of the state senate. Stevenson also served as a mayor of Lock Haven, as postmaster, and as a trustee of the university. The system of dams on the West Branch valley of the Susquehanna River was a concept of Senator Stevenson. Robert S. Bravard, Director of Library Services (1970–1998) Stevenson Library is the university&apos;s library. It is a new state-of-the-art facility which offers students many different options. Its archive collection includes every student newspaper (The Eagle Eye) since 1965, as well as every yearbook (The Praeco) since 1913 until it was discontinued in 1980; and was reinstated in 2006. The archive collection also provides the university with rare books and photographs. { LHU Archive Home Page. } The library offers internet database services that gives the university access to full text magazine and newspaper articles, DVDs, books, and an array of information. The Children&apos;s Library on the ground floor of the building contains over 20,000  children&apos;s books. { Children&apos;s Library. Lock Haven University. } Stevenson also offers reference services, wireless internet, computer access, and a 24-hour study lounge. [ Media ] Lock Haven University sign [ Television ] Lock Haven University&apos;s student-operated television station, The Havenscope, LHUTV broadcasts news, sports, and other programs. Its studio occupies [ 2300 sqft m2 ] next to WLHU, Lock Haven University&apos;s radio station. The television studio is wholly digital and consists of a teleprompter system, two editing bays, and a full complement of field production equipment. It includes two backdrops, one for news broadcasts and one for interviews. The studio is on the sixth floor of Robinson Hall and is equipped with a green screen, at least three main broadcast cameras, a sound mixing board, switchboard, character generator, several broadcast monitors, a roll-in system, and many other broadcast systems. The studio usually airs at least one show a week called LHU in Review hosted by LHU students which covers news, sports and other topics. In the late 1980&apos;s students began airing a short morning news segment called &quot; The Morning Alarm &quot; that ran at the top of the hour. The first segment aired live and was then re-broadcast over the campus television network between breakfast and lunch. The television station also broadcasts sporting events, soap operas, game shows, and many other programs. [ Radio ] Lock Haven University&apos;s radio station is WLHU Toxic Radio, located in the same facility as their new and improved television studio, allowing easy access between the two stations. WLHU has a free format program schedule using a well equipped studio which broadcasts daily, as well as broadcasting many sporting events and many other programs throughout the school year. Students have the ability to join the school&apos;s radio club and create their own radio station broadcast. [ Newspaper ] Lock Haven University&apos;s student campus newspaper, The Eagle Eye, has a modern computer production facility that includes a desktop graphics text scanner, CD-ROMS, digital photography, World Wide Web interface, and the page-making program most widely used in commercial newspapers. Students may earn a staff position on the newspaper in their first year at the university. [ Student government ] The Student Cooperative Council, Incorporated is the student government of Lock Haven University. The council is housed in the Parsons Union Building. The council works on behalf of the students and is run by students. The organization is made up of the following organs: Student Senate Executive Council Student Activities Office Lock Haven University Bookstore Clubs and Organizations Student Recreation Center [ Student Senate ] The Student Senate is composed of 50 (1 per 100 students) members who, are elected and serve, an academic year for the student body. Senators represent their constituents on and off campus by bringing students concerns, opinions, and by voting on the status of clubs and organizations at biweekly meetings. Meetings are open to the public and are held throughout the academic year. This organ is the true voice of the student body. Senators elect two senators for the following stipend positions: Speaker of the Senate Recording Secretary [ Executive Council ] The Executive Council is made up of three elected officers; and seven chosen members (and confirmed by senate) the elected officers to serve a year in their respected positions: President (Elected) Vice President (Elected) Treasurer (Elected) Corresponding Secretary (Chosen) Campus Food Service Liaison (Chosen) Public Relations &amp; Marketing Liaison(Chosen) Student Activities Liaison (Chosen) Student Life Liaison (Chair) Special Projects Liaison (Chosen) The duties of each chair are specified in the SCC, Inc. Constitution. The president’s main focus is to guide and oversee the agenda for their administration. The members of the Executive Council carry out the agenda through their specific chair positions. [ Campus and student life ] [ Campus Violence Prevention Program ] CVPP focuses on educational programming, awareness and prevention of domestic violence, sexual assault and stalking. For further information on campus services, contact the Director, Jennifer Bodnar. We have a counselor who will support victims of these crimes and her name is Claudia Hutchinson. [ Student Activities Office ] The Student Activities Office is composed of professional staff (employed by the SCC) who are responsible for seeing that the day to day functions for the SCC, Inc. They are the following: Student Activities Director Budget Manager Register Budget Assistant Assistant Activities Director [ Bookstore ] The bookstore at LHU is owned and operated by the SCC, Inc. All profits from the bookstore go towards supporting clubs and organizations on campus. The location of the bookstore is in the lower part of the PUB. [ Clubs and organizations ] The SCC, Inc supports and funds over 130 clubs and organizations on campus. Student activity fees and profits generated through the bookstore support these clubs. Requests to start new clubs can be filled out in the Executive Council Office. A full list of clubs and organizations on campus is available in the SAO. [ Student Recreation Center ] The Student Recreation Center is open to all students of LHU. This facility provides students with recreation activities to stay physically fit. The SRC contains an inventory of equipment that includes a rock wall, an indoor track that’s 1/8 of a mile long, basketball, racquetball, and intramural sports. { LHU Recreation Center. } [ Other services provided by the SCC, Inc. for its students ] Legal advice Commuter Lounge with 12 computers Game room Vending &amp; Laundry Sponsor of various student functions [ Athletics ] [ Lock Haven University Bald Eagles ] [ National Collegiate Boxing Association http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/National_Collegiate_Boxing_Association 2009-08-29 ] Affiliation: National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) Division I and Division II Conference: Pennsylvania State Athletic Conference (PSAC) Facilities: McCollum Field, Hubert Jack Stadium, Thomas Field House Center, Foundation Fields, Charlotte E. Smith Field, Rogers Gymnasium, West Branch Cross Country Course, Tomlinson Center, Zimmerli Pool Team name: Bald Eagles Team colors: crimson and white In 2007, Lock Haven won the National Collegiate Boxing Association national championship. Lock Haven won the NAIA national wrestling championship in 1961, 1963, 1966 and 1967. Lock Haven won the NCAA Division II Women&apos;s Softball National Championship in 2006 and 2009 [ Fredericks Family Memorial Carillon ] The Fredericks Family Memorial Carillon was designed and completed by the van Bergen Company, which specializes in bells, in 2000. The grand carillon is one of fewer than 200  grand carillons in North America. It weighs more than [ 25000 lb kg ] and can be played manually or by an automatic system that can produce 500  songs from memory. The bells were cast in the world famous French foundry Fonderie Paccard. { van Bergen Bells, Lock Haven University. } The carillon has become an important part of the university&apos;s image. [ Institute for International Studies ] LHU&apos;s Institute for International Studies offers study abroad programs for its students. The program offer students the choice to study from 32 different schools in 20 different countries around the world. Students have the choice to study abroad for semester long, a whole academic year, or summer programs. { International Studies. Lock Haven University. } [ Recreation Center ] LHU&apos;s recreation center facility includes a weight room, thirteen outside tennis courts, three indoor basketball courts and one outside court. The facility also hosts one volleyball court, three racquetball rooms, one multi activities room, and a rock wall. [ Durrwachter Alumni Conference Center ] The Durrwachter Alumni Conference Center is a new facility, completed in fall 2007, named after Dr. George A. and Shirley Durrwachter. He is a 1961 health and physical education graduate, university trustee and member of the LHU Foundation board of directors who donated $1 million together with his wife, Shirley, for the conference center. For visitors and new LHU students, the conference center houses university admissions with expanded meeting spaces. For alumni, it has a number of meeting and conference rooms, including the Fredericks Family Library to house books and publications authored by alumni and faculty, areas of recognition of service to the university and several social areas. The conference center also contains a multipurpose room that can seat 300 to 400 people, along with smaller conference rooms. [ LHU Evergreen Commons Apartment Complex ] Lock Haven University Apartment Complex which features apartments for students at LHU. The building is one of the many facilities that have been constructed in recent years. Others include the Recreation Center, the Durrwachter Alumni Conference Center, Fredericks Family Memorial carillon. [ Notable alumni ] Bret Shugarts NFL player, played for Pittsburgh Steelers John Eisenhooth NFL player, played for Seattle Seahawks Jim Larkin NFL player, played for Buffalo Bills Harris Jacob Bixler (1862–1930), U.S. Congressman from Pennsylvania, 1921–27 Harry L. Haines (1880–1947), U.S. Congressman from Pennsylvania, 1931–39 and 1941–43 Red Murray (1884–1954), professional MLB baseball player for the St. Louis Cardinals and San Francisco Giants. J. Buell Snyder (1877–1946), U.S. Congressman from Pennsylvania, 1933–46 Kevin O&apos;Dea, NFL assistant special teams coach for several teams including the San Diego Chargers, Tampa Bay Buccaneers, Detroit Lions, Arizona Cardinals, presently with the Chicago Bears Jamie Varner (b.1984), Mixed Martial Artist and Former WEC Lightweight Champion Charlie Brenneman (b.1981), Mixed Martial Artist Fighting For The Ultimate Fighting Championship Tim Boetsch (b.1981), Mixed Martial Artist Fighting For The Ultimate Fighting Championship Charley Molnar (b.1984), Offensive Coordinator and QB Coach for The University of Notre Dame Kevin Rush TMBSL Manager/Owner New Jersey Nets Brittani Kline (b.1991), Winner, America&apos;s Next Top Model, (did not finish) Sara McMann (b.1980), 2004 Olympic silver medalist in wrestling [ References ] [ September 2008 ] [ article September 2008 ] [ External links ] Lock Haven University of Pennsylvania Clearfield Campus Website Haven Sports Home Page Campus Violence Prevention Program [ 41.141 -77.461 region:US-PA_type:edu title ] Category:Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools Category:American Association of State Colleges and Universities Category:Eastern Pennsylvania Rugby Union Category:Educational institutions established in 1870 Category:Universities and colleges in Pennsylvania Category:Pennsylvania State Athletic Conference Category:Universities and colleges in Clinton County, Pennsylvania Category:Universities and colleges in Clearfield County, Pennsylvania sv:Lock Haven University of Pennsylvania