[ April 2008 ] [ March 2012 ] [ Keimyung University 계명대학교 Logo of Keimyung University 진리와 정의와 사랑의 나라를 위하여 For the Kingdom of Truth, Justice and Love 1954 Private Synn Ilhi Daegu South Korea 27,000 700 Urban http://www.kmu.ac.kr ] [ Korean name 계명대학교 啓明大學校 Gyemyeong Daehakgyo Kyemyŏng Taehakkyo ] Keimyung University (KMU or colloquially known as Kei-dae) is a private university in South Korea. The university was founded in 1954 by the leaders of the Northern Presbyterian Church of the U.S. as a Christian university. Its motto is &apos;For the Kingdom of Truth, Justice and Love&apos;. KMU is composed of three campuses in the city of Daegu, South Korea. They are named for their locations within the city; Daemyeong, which is near the downtown area, Seongseo, which is in the western part of the city, and also Dongsan campus which includes Dongsan Medical Center. [ History ] Keimyung University Keimyung University originated from Keimyung Christian College, which was founded in March 1954, by Reverend Edward Adams, an American missionary of the Northern Presbyterian Church of the U.S., and by Reverends Choi Jaehwa and Kang Ingu, two local Presbyterian Church leaders. The founding principle guiding their concerted efforts was to provide Koreans with higher education firmly anchored in Christianity. 1978, the year of Keimyung&apos;s elevation to the status of a university, marked the beginning of a new period of rapid development. In October 1980, the university merged with the Dongsan Presbyterian Hospital, a prestigious local hospital with 81-year history of service, and re-opened it as Keimyung University Medical Center. The development of Keimyung acquired a new dimension in the early 1980s when it added a new campus built on 550,000 pyeong (181,500 sq. meters) at Seongseo in Sindang-dong, Dalseo-gu, to its existing Daemyeong and Dongsan campuses. As of March 2003, Keimyung comprised over 27,000 students and over 2,400 faculty members and employees in 25 majors, 68 departments in 11 faculties and 20 colleges, 13 graduate schools, 34 attached and affiliated institutes including Dongsan Medical Center and 17 affiliated research centers. [ Academics ] [ Undergraduate colleges ] College of Humanities College of International Studies College of Education College of Business Administration College of Social Sciences College of Law &amp; Police Sciences College of Natural Sciences College of Environment College of Engineering College of Nursing College of Medicine College of Music &amp; Performing Arts College of Fine Arts College of Fashion College of Physical Education College of Media Arts Keimyung Adams College [ Graduate schools ] [ General programs ] Graduate School of Humanities &amp; Social Sciences Graduate School of Natural Sciences Graduate School of Engineering Graduate School of Arts &amp; Physical Education Graduate School of Medicine [ Professional schools ] Graduate School Graduate School of Education Graduate School of Business Administration Graduate School of Policy Studies Graduate School of Women&apos;s Studies Graduate School of Industrial Technology Graduate School of International Studies United Graduate School of Theology Graduate School of Arts Graduate School of Design Graduate School of Industrial Sports Graduate School of Early Childhood Education Graduate School of Health Care Administration Graduate School of Environment [ Facilities ] [ Dormitory ] Dormitory, Keimyung University Housing Number of rooms Room type Amenities International House 158 30㎡ Bed, air conditioner, desk, closet, shoe rack, telephone, Lan connection, washroom General House 698 12.5㎡ 1 room for 2 persons Bed, air conditioner, desk, closet, shoe rack, telephone, Lan connection, washroom [ Dongsan Library ] Dongsan Library, Keimyung University The Dongsan Library, originally known as the Library of Keimyung Christian College, was established in July 1958. It was moved to its current site at the Seongseo Campus in March 1993 to facilitate expansion into a much larger facility that meets the needs of the information age. The Dongsan Library comprises three separate libraries: the main Dongsan Library at Seongseo Campus (seven stories above and two below ground level, with a total floor space of 6,538 pyeong), the second Dongsan Library at the Daemyung Dong Campus (seven stories above and two below ground level, with a total floor space of 5,392 pyeong) and the Medical Library at Dongsan Medical Center. Equipped with sophisticated multi-media functions and an advanced information retrieval network, the Dongsan Library is now the focal point for research activities of faculty members as well as students. At present, the Dongsan Library houses around one and a half- million books, including specialized reference books, scientific journals, theses, ancient documents, micro-data, CD-ROMs and multi-media materials. The information or data owned by the Dongsan Library is made available for users around the world through the Keimyung University Library Integrated Information Management System (KIMS). [ Dongsan Medical Center ] Keimyung University Medical Center consists of a medical school, Dongsan hospital, and Gyeongju Dongsan hospital. The History of Dongsan Medical Center dates back to 1899 when Dr. Woodbridge O. Johnson, an American Missionary dispatched by the Korean Mission of the Northern Presbyterian Church of the United States, started the Salvation Hospital and became the founder of the medical center. It was the beginning of the first medical activity in Daegu. Dongsan Medical Center merged with Keimyung University in 1978 to establish a Medical School and at present it has 1,000 bed capacity with 1,700 employees. Entering upon the 21st century, Dongsan Medical Center will spare no effort to move Medical School, Nursing College, Second Dongsan Hospital and Medical Science and Research Building to Keimyung University Sungsuh Campus. [ Museum ] Museum, Keimyung University Since it was established on May 20, 1978, the Museum has devoted its efforts to studying the historical and cultural heritage of the local region with a special focus on Kaya, an ancient civilization that once flourished in Korea, but which left few records. Since then, the museum has accomplished much, including the excavation of the royal tombs of the Kaya Dynasty.Many Kaya artifacts uncovered through those efforts are on display in the Museum. Currently, a plan is under way to construct a new museum on a 9,900 square-meter site with a total floor space of 5,940 square meters. The opening is scheduled for May 2004, which will also mark the 50th anniversary of the university. The new museum building will feature a university history gallery, Korean history gallery, curatorial department, a conservation science laboratory, and other accommodations including a museum shop and a cafe. [ Edward Adams Hall of Worship and Praise (Adams Chapel) ] Adams Chapel &amp; Keimyung Hanhak-chon, Keimyung University Located high on the flank of Kungsan Hill above the Seongseo Campus of Keimyung University, the Edward Adams Hall of Worship and Praise (known as the Adams Chapel) was built to honor the achievements of missionary Edward Adams, one of the founders of Keimyung University. The Adams Hall of Worship and Praise has three towers on the facade and a central domed tower. Those three towers in front (the two to the right of the center and one to the left) represent Keimyung University&apos;s educational precept, &quot; truth &quot;, &quot; justice &quot;, and &quot; love &quot;, and the central dome represents &quot; the Kingdom of God &quot;. The seven round columns in the main chapel represent the 7 early churches in Asia referred to in the Book of Revelation in the New Testament. In the main chapel there is a beautiful pipe organ built by Karl Schuke company of Germany. On the front of the organ are three crowns, underneath each of which are arranged seven pipes. These represent the Holy Trinity, as well as the seven angels with seven trumpets as recorded in the Book of Revelation. In addition, the Adams Chapel has over 160 stained glass windows of various sizes. The stained glass window depict the twelve disciples of Christ, the three Wise Men, the Ten Commandments, the judgement of Solomon and other stories from the Bible. The pipe organ, the stained glass, the chapel chairs, and the marble of the columns of the Adams Chapel were all made through the generous donation from the friendly Keimyung University. [ Keimyung Adams College ] Keimyung Adams College is an honors college within Keimyung University. All of its courses are taught in English according to North American and European standards and norms. Most of Keimyung Adams&apos; professors come from North America and Europe as well. Its student enrollment includes both Korean national students and international students. It offers three bachelor degrees in International Business, International Relations, and in Information Technology. Because Keimyung Adams&apos; curriculum is based on North American and European norms, it is a popular school for exchange students. Keimyung Adams also supports international students seeking a dual-degree from abroad; this program requires a four semester residency. Requirements for graduation from each of Keimyung Adams&apos; degree programs require a senior thesis, an international internship, and accomplishment in Korean, English, and either Japanese or Mandarin languages. [ Keimyung-Chopin Music Academy ] Access to courses taught by Polish professors from the F. Chopin Academy of Music, Keimyung has established itself as a music education institute in Korea. In order to improve the quality of music education offered to its students, the university opened the Keimyung-Chopin Music Academy in close collaboration with the F. Chopin Academy of Music in Poland, a music education institute with a well-established international reputation. As a Korean replication of the aforementioned institute, the Keimyung-Chopin Music Academy provides musical education ensured by the fact that twelve resident Polish professors select 30 students every year from among the entering class of the College of Music of Keimyung through a process of highly competitive auditions and in-depth interviews. [ Courses in English ] ▷ Keimyung Adams College: Keimyung has an all-English program at Keimyung Adams College for undergraduate degrees in International Business, International Relations, and Information Technology. Coursework also includes classes in History, Economics, and International Law. ▷ Korean Tradition: Korean Language, Korean History, Introduction to Korean Culture, Korean Religion and Thought, Introduction to Korean Zen Buddhism, Korean Literature in English ▷ Politics &amp; Economics: Fundamentals of Economics, Micro and Macro Economics, Comparative Politics in East Asia, Korean Economy, Global E-business in East Asia ▷ Society &amp; Culture: Cross-Cultural Communication, Mass Media &amp; Popular Culture in Korea, Oriental Thought &amp; Counseling ▷ Arts: Taekwondo, Korean Dance, Oriental Painting, Korean Ceramics, Korean Traditional Music ▷ College of Law and Police Sciences: Legal English, Introduction to American Law, American Criminal Justice, American Police Law, Crime Prevention, Criminal Justice Theory &amp; Policy, International Criminal Law, White Collar Crime ▷ Other Programs and Courses: Many departments at Keimyung have courses for English proficiency in reading, writing, and conversation. [ Korean Language Program ] The Korean Language Institute of The Center for International Education at KMU offers international students a Korean language course. Each class has a small group of students - 12 students on average. The institute has a very systematic program such as cultural experiences, regular field trips and festivals for international students, providing a chance to learn the language and the culture. [ CCAP (Cross Cultural Awareness Programme) ] KMU has been exclusively designated as the CCAP partner institute of Daegu and Gyeongbuk area by Korean National Commission of UNESCO since 2005. CCAP invites international students in Korea to present the culture of their homelands to Korean youth. [ See also ] List of Korea-related topics List of colleges and universities in South Korea Education in South Korea [ External links ] Keimyung University (Korean) Keimyung University (English) Keimyung Adams College (English) Graduate School of Business (English) Keimyung Art Center (English) [ South Korea ] * ko:계명대학교 ja:啓明大学校 zh:啟明大學