[ SPD ] { Sigmar Gabriel } { Vice Chairmen } { Hannelore Kraft } { Klaus Wowereit } { Olaf Scholz } { Manuela Schwesig } { Aydan Özoğuz } { Andrea Nahles } { 23 May 1863 ( } { ADAV ) 7 August 1869 ( } { SDAP ) 27 May 1875 (merger) } { Social democracy } [ Social Democracy in Power: the capacity to reform Merkel Wolfgang Alexander Petring, Christian Henkes, Christoph Egle 2008 Taylor &amp; Francis London 0-415-43820-9 ] { Centre-left } { Socialist International } { Party of European Socialists } { Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats } { Red } { Jusos } { Women&apos;s wing } { Association of Social Democratic Women } { Socialist German Student Union (1946-1961), } { Juso-Hochschulgruppen (since 1973) } { 2011 } { 493,664 http://www.tagesschau.de/inland/fdp614.html } { Bundestag } [ 146 620 #DC143C ] { Regional Parliaments } [ 592 1890 #DC143C ] { European Parliament } [ 23 99 #DC143C ] { Prime ministers of states } [ 7 16 #DC143C ] { Willy-Brandt -Haus D-10911 } { Berlin } The Social Democratic Party of Germany (Sozialdemokratische Partei Deutschlands, SPD) is a social-democratic political party in Germany. The party is one of the two major contemporary political parties in Germany, along with the conservative CDU/CSU, and is led by Sigmar Gabriel. The SPD last governed at the federal level in a grand coalition with the Christian Democratic Union and the Christian Social Union from 2005 until 27 October 2009. The SPD conceded defeat in the federal election of September 2009, with its share of votes having dropped from 34.2% to 23%, compared to 2005, and became the largest opposition party represented in the Bundestag. The party participates in ten state governments, of which seven are governed by SPD Minister-President s. The SPD is a full member party of the Party of European Socialists and the Socialist International. It is Germany&apos;s oldest political party, established in 1875, in the German Parliament. It was also one of the first Marxist -influenced parties in the world. [ Party platform ] The SPD was established as a socialist party in 1875. However, the SPD underwent a major shift in policies reflected in the differences between the Heidelberg Program of 1925, which &quot; called for the transformation of the capitalist system of private ownership of the means of production to social ownership &quot;, { Brustein, William. Logic of Evil: The Social Origins of the Nazi Party 1925-1933. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1996. p. 131. } and the Godesberg Program of 1959, which aimed to broaden its voter base and move its political position toward the centre. { Cooper, Alice Holmes. Paradoxes of Peace: German Peace Movements since 1945. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press, 1996. p. 85 } After World War II, under the leadership of Kurt Schumacher, the SPD re-established itself as a socialist party, representing the interests of the working class and the trade union s. With the Godesberg Program of 1959, however, the party evolved from a socialist working-class party to a modern social-democratic party working within capitalism. The current party platform of the SPD espouses the goal of social democracy, which is seen as a vision of a societal arrangement in which freedom and social justice are paramount. According to the party platform, freedom, justice, and social solidarity, form the basis of social democracy. The coordinated social market economy should be strengthened, and its output should be distributed fairly. The party sees that economic system as necessary in order to ensure the affluence of the entire population. The SPD also tries to protect the society&apos;s disadvantaged with a welfare state. Concurrently, it advocates a sustainable fiscal policy that doesn&apos;t place a burden on future generations while eradicating budget deficits. In social policy, the SPD stands for civil and political rights in an open society. In foreign policy, the SPD aims at ensuring global peace by balancing global interests with democratic means. Thus, European integration is one of the main priorities of the SPD. [ Internal groupings ] The SPD is mostly composed of members belonging to either of the two main wings: Keynesian social democrats, and the Third Way, moderate social democrats belonging to the Seeheimer Kreis. While the moderate, Seeheimer Kreis social democrats strongly support the Agenda 2010 reformist programs introduced by former Chancellor Gerhard Schröder, the Keynesian social democrats continue to defend classical left-wing policies such as the expansion of the welfare state. The classical left-wing of the SPD claims that in recent years the welfare state has been curtailed through reform programs such as the Agenda 2010, Hartz IV and the more economic liberal stance of the SPD, which was endorsed by the moderate social democrats. [ Base of support ] [ Social structure ] Before World War II, as the main non-revolutionary left-wing party, the Social Democrats fared best among non- Catholic workers as well as intellectuals favouring social progressive causes and increased economic equality. Led by Kurt Schumacher after World War II, the SPD initially opposed both the social market economy and Konrad Adenauer &apos;s drive towards western integration fiercely, but after Schumacher&apos;s death, it accepted the social market economy and Germany&apos;s position in the Western alliance in order to appeal to a broader range of voters. It still remains associated with the economic causes of unionised employees and working class voters. In the 1990s, the left and moderate wings of the party drifted apart, culminating in a secession of a significant number of party members, which later joined the socialist party WASG, which later merged into The Left (Die Linke) party. { Sigmar Gabriel } [ Geographic distribution ] Geographically, much of the SPD&apos;s current-day support comes from large cities, especially of northern and western Germany and Berlin. The metropolitan area of the Ruhr Area, where coal mining and steel production were once the biggest sources of revenues, have provided a significant base for the SPD in the 20th century. In the state of Bremen, made up of the cities of Bremen and Bremerhaven, the SPD has governed without interruption since 1949. In southern Germany, the SPD typically garners less support except in the largest cities. At the 2009 federal election, the party lost its only constituency in the entire state of Bavaria (in Munich ). Small town and rural support comes especially from the traditionally Protestant areas of northern Germany and Brandenburg (with notable exceptions such as Western Pomerania where CDU leader Angela Merkel was re-elected in 2005) and a number of university towns. A striking example of the general pattern is the traditionally Catholic Emsland, where the Social Democrats generally gain a low percentage of votes, whereas the Reformed Protestant region of East Frisia directly to the north, with its strong traditional streak of anti-Catholism, is one of their strongest constituencies. Further south, the SPD also enjoys solid support in northern Hesse ( Hans Eichel was mayor of Kassel, then Hesse&apos;s minister president, then finance minister in the Schröder administration, while Brigitte Zypries served as Justice Minister), parts of Palatinate ( Kurt Beck was party leader until 7 September 2008), the Saarland (political home of one-time candidate for federal chancellor Oskar Lafontaine, defected from the SPD in 1999), and southwestern Baden ( Marion Caspers-Merk, Gernot Erler ). [ History ] [ History of the Social Democratic Party of Germany ] The General German Workers&apos; Association (Allgemeiner Deutscher Arbeiterverein, ADAV), founded in 1863, and the Social Democratic Workers&apos; Party (Sozialdemokratische Arbeiterpartei Deutschlands, SDAP), founded in 1869, merged in 1875, under the name Socialist Workers&apos; Party of Germany (Sozialistische Arbeiterpartei Deutschlands, SAPD). From 1878 to 1890, any grouping or meeting that aimed at spreading socialist principles was banned (anti-Socialist laws), but it still gained support in elections. In 1890, when the ban was lifted and it could again present electoral lists, the party adopted its current name. In the years leading up to World War I, the party remained ideologically radical in official principle, although many party officials tended to be moderate in everyday politics. By 1912, the party claimed the most votes of any German party. Despite the agreement of the Second International to oppose the First World War, the SPD voted in favor of war in 1914. In response to this and the Bolshevik Revolution, members of the left and of the far-left of the SPD formed alternative parties, first the Spartacus League, then the Independent Social Democratic Party of Germany and later the Communist Party of Germany. After 1918 the SPD played an important role in the political system of the Weimar Republic, although it took part in coalition governments only in few years (1918–1921, 1923, 1928–1930). Adolf Hitler prohibited the party in 1933 under the Enabling Act - some party officials were imprisoned, killed or went into exile. In exile, the party used the name Sopade. Between 1921 and 1923, 350 assassinations of political figures took place. { Manchester, William. The Arms Of Krupp. Little, Brown. 1968. 976 pgs. 300-330. } In 1945, the allied occupants in the Western zones initially allowed four parties to be established, which led to the Christian Democratic Union, the Free Democratic Party, the Communist Party of Germany, and the SPD being established. In the Soviet Zone of Occupation, the Soviets forced the Social Democrats to form a common party with the Communists ( Socialist Unity Party of Germany or SED). In the Western zones, the Communist Party was later (1956) banned by West Germany&apos;s Federal Constitutional Court. Since 1949, in the Federal Republic of Germany, the SPD has been one of the two major parties, with the other being the Christian Democratic Union. From 1969 to 1982 and 1998 to 2005 the Chancellors of Germany were Social Democrats whereas the other years the Chancellors were Christian Democrats. [ Notes ] [ See also ] Politics of Germany Party finance in Germany List of political parties in Germany Bundestag (Federal Assembly of Germany) Weimar Republic Kurt Nehrling Mierscheid Law German election, March 1933 Elections in the Free State of Prussia [ Further reading ] Carl E. Schorske, German Social Democracy, 1905–1917: The Development of the Great Schism (Harvard University Press, 1955). Vernon L. Lidtke, The Outlawed Party: Social Democracy in Germany, 1878–1890 (Princeton University Press, 1966). German Social Democratic Party, 1914–1921&apos;&apos; (Columbia University Press, 1949). Erich Matthias, The Downfall of the Old Social Democratic Party in 1933 pages 51–105 from Republic to Reich The Making of the Nazi Revolution Ten Essays edited by Hajo Holborn, (New York: Pantheon Books, 1972). [ External links ] [ Sozialdemokratische Partei Deutschlands Social Democratic Party of Germany ] Party official website Official website of the youth organization, the &apos;&apos;Jusos&apos;&apos; History of the German social-democratic party from Lassalle to Kautsky, by fractal-vortex Category:Political parties established in 1863 Category:Political parties in Germany Category:Political parties of the German Empire Category:Political parties in Weimar Germany Category:Party of European Socialists member parties Category:Social democratic parties Category:Socialist and social democratic parties in Germany Category:Socialist International Category:Second International Category:Members of the Labour and Socialist International [ he ] als:Sozialdemokratische Partei Deutschlands ar:الحزب الديمقراطي الاجتماعي الألماني az:Sosial Demokrat Partiyası (Almaniya) zh-min-nan:Tek-kok Siā-hōe-bîn-chú Tóng be:Сацыял-дэмакратычная партыя Германіі bg:Германска социалдемократическа партия bar:SPD bs:Socijaldemokratska partija Njemačke br:Sozialdemokratische Partei Deutschlands ca:Partit Socialdemòcrata d&apos;Alemanya cs:Sociálnědemokratická strana Německa da:SPD pdc:SPD de:Sozialdemokratische Partei Deutschlands et:Saksamaa Sotsiaaldemokraatlik Partei el:Σοσιαλδημοκρατικό Κόμμα της Γερμανίας es:Partido Socialdemócrata de Alemania eo:Socialdemokratia Partio de Germanio eu:Alemaniako Alderdi Sozialdemokrata fa:حزب سوسیال دموکرات آلمان fr:Parti social-démocrate d&apos;Allemagne ga:Páirtí Sóisialta Daonlathach na Gearmáine gv:Partee Deynlagh Soshialagh ny Germaan gl:Partido Socialdemócrata de Alemaña ko:독일 사회민주당 hy:Գերմանիայի սոցիալ-դեմոկրատական կուսակցություն hsb:Sozialdemokratische Partei Deutschlands hr:Socijaldemokratska stranka Njemačke id:Partai Sosial Demokratis Jerman it:Partito Socialdemocratico Tedesco he:המפלגה הסוציאל-דמוקרטית של גרמניה ka:გერმანიის სოციალ-დემოკრატიული პარტია ku:Partiya Sosyaldemokrat a Almanya la:Socialis Democratica Factio Germaniae lv:Vācijas Sociāldemokrātiskā partija lt:Vokietijos socialdemokratų partija hu:Németország Szociáldemokrata Pártja mk:Социјалдемократска партија на Германија ms:Parti Demokratik Sosial Jerman nl:Sozialdemokratische Partei Deutschlands ne:जर्मन सामाजिक-जनवादी पार्टी ja:ドイツ社会民主党 no:Sozialdemokratische Partei Deutschlands nn:Sozialdemokratische Partei Deutschlands pfl:Sozialdemokradischi Pardai Daitschlonds nds:Sozialdemokratsche Partei Düütschland pl:Socjaldemokratyczna Partia Niemiec pt:Partido Social-Democrata da Alemanha ro:Partidul Social Democrat al Germaniei ru:Социал-демократическая партия Германии stq:Sozialdemokratiske Paatäi Düütsklounds sq:Sozialdemokratische Partei Deutschlands simple:Social Democratic Party of Germany sk:Sociálnodemokratická strana Nemecka sr:Социјалдемократска партија Немачке sh:Socijaldemokratska partija Njemačke fi:Saksan sosiaalidemokraattinen puolue sv:Socialdemokraterna (Tyskland) tr:Almanya Sosyal Demokrat Partisi uk:Соціал-демократична партія Німеччини diq:Partiya Sosyaldemokrata Almanya bat-smg:Vuokītėjės suocēldemuokratu partėjė zh:德国社会民主党