[ April 2009 ] Military tactics, the science and art of organizing a military force, are the techniques for using weapons or military units in combination for engaging and defeating an enemy in battle. [ Clausewitz Carl On War 1832 ] Changes in philosophy and technology over time have been reflected in changes to military tactics. In current military thought, tactics are the lowest of three planning levels. The highest tier of planning is the strategy, which is about how force is translated into political objectives, or more specifically how you bridge the means and ends of war together. An intermediate level, which converts strategy into tactics is the operational level that deals with formations of units. In common vernacular, &quot; tactical &quot; decisions are those made to achieve greatest immediate value and &quot; strategic &quot; decisions are those made to achieve the greatest overall value irrespective of immediate return. [ Concept ] { German } { World War I } { observation post disguised as a tree. } Military tactics are both a science and an art. The main concept of these tactics is to maintain a positional army and hence easily control the army in any position and situation. Some practices have not changed since the dawn of warfare: ambushes, seeking and turning flanks, maintaining reconnaissance, creating and using obstacles and defences, etc. Using ground to best advantage has not changed much either. Heights, rivers, swamps, passes, choke points, and natural cover, can all be used in multiple ways. Before the nineteenth century, many military tactics were confined to battle field concerns: how to maneuver units during combat in open terrain. Nowadays, specialized tactics exist for many situations, for example for securing a room in a building. What does change constantly is the technological dimension, as well as the sociology of combatants. One might wish to reflect on the differences in the technology and society that produced such different types of soldier or warrior as the Roman Legionary, the Medieval Knight, the Turk-Mongol Horse Archer, the Chinese Crossbowman, the British Redcoat, or an Air Cavalry trooper. Each, constrained by his weaponry, logistics and his social conditioning, would use a battlefield differently, but would usually seek the same outcomes from their use of tactics. In many respects the First World War changed the use of tactics used as advances in technology rendered prior tactics useless. [ See also ] List of military tactics [ References ] [ Notes ] [ Bibliography ] [ How to win on the battlefield : 25 key tactics to outwit, outflank, and outfight the enemy Thames &amp; Hudson Johnson, Rob, Michael Whitby, John France 2010 978-0-500-25161-4 ] [ German Tactics in the Italian Campaign http://www.larchivio.org/xoom/gerhardmuhm2.htm Muhm Gerhard ] Gerhard Muhm : La Tattica nella campagna ass d’Italia, in LINEA GOTICA AVAMPOSTO DEI BALCANI, (Hrsg.) Amedeo Montemaggi - Edizioni Civitas, Roma 1993 [ External links ] Everycitizenasoldier.org - tactical principles Contemporary Marine tactics for war fighting Napoleon&apos;s tactics and strategy Small Unit Actions during German Campaign in Russia ar:تكتيك عسكري bg:Военна тактика ca:Tàctica militar cs:Vojenská taktika cy:Tacteg filwrol de:Taktik (Militär) es:Táctica militar fa:تاکتیک نظامی fr:Tactique militaire ko:전술 hr:Vojna taktika id:Taktik perang it:Tattica militare he:תורת לחימה lt:Taktinės vietovės savybės mk:Воена тактика ms:Taktik tentera nl:Tactiek pl:Taktyka pt:Tática militar ru:Тактика sk:Vojenská taktika sl:Vojaška taktika sr:Војна тактика sh:Vojna taktika sv:Taktik ta:போர் உத்தி th:ยุทธวิธี uk:Військова тактика ur:مصافیات vi:Chiến thuật quân sự zh:軍事戰術