[ Barn-owls Masked owl mask4441.jpg Australian Masked Owl, Tyto novaehollandiae Animal ia Chordata Aves Strigiformes Tytonidae Ridgway, 1914 Genera Tyto Phodilus For fossil genera, see article. Tytoninae sensu Sibley &amp; Ahlquist ] Barn-owls (family Tytonidae) are one of the two families of owls, the other being the true owl s, Strigidae. They are medium to large sized owls with large heads and characteristic heart-shaped faces. They have long, strong legs with powerful talon s. They also differ from Strigidae in structural details relating in particular to the sternum and feet. The barn owls comprise two extant sub-families: the Tytoninae or Tyto owls (including the Common Barn Owl ) and the Phodilinae or bay-owls. The Sibley-Ahlquist taxonomy unites the Caprimulgiformes with the owl order; here, the barn-owls are a subfamily Tytoninae. This is unsupported by more recent research (see Cypselomorphae ), but the relationships of the owls in general are still unresolved. The barn owls are a wide ranging family, although they are absent from northern North America, Sahara n Africa and large areas of Asia. They live in a wide range of habitats from desert s to forest s, and from temperate latitudes to the tropics. The majority of the 16 living species of barn owls are poorly known. Some, like the Red Owl, have barely been seen or studied since their discovery, in contrast to the Common Barn Owl, which is one of the best known owl species in the world. However, some sub-species of the Common Barn Owl possibly deserve to be a separate species, but are very poorly known. Five species of barn-owl are threatened, and some island species have gone extinct during the Holocene or earlier (e.g. Tyto pollens, known from the fossil record of Andros Island in the Bahamas, and possibly the basis for the Chickcharnie ). The barn-owls are mostly nocturnal, and generally non- migratory, living in pairs or singly. [ Description ] The barn-owls&apos; main characteristic is the heart-shaped facial disc, formed by stiff feather s which serve to amplify and locate the source of sounds when hunting. Further adaptations in the wing feathers eliminate sound caused by flying, aiding both the hearing of the owl listening for hidden prey and keeping the prey unaware of the owl. Barn-owls overall are darker on the back than the front, usually an orange-brown colour, the front being a paler version of the back or mottled, although there is considerable variation even amongst species. The bay-owls closely resemble the Tyto owls but have a divided facial disc, ear tufts, and tend to be smaller. [ Species ] The fossil record of the barn-owls goes back to the Eocene, with the family eventually losing ground to the true owls after the radiation of rodent s and owls during the Neogene epoch. Two subfamilies are only known from the fossil record, the Necrobyinae and the Selenornithinae. Numerous extinct species of Tyto have been described; see the genus page for more information. Genus Tyto { Barn owl } Cave-nesting Masked Owl, T. novaehollandiae troughtoni - disputed; probably extinct (1960s) { Golden Masked Owl, T. aurantia } { Lesser Masked Owl, T. sororcula } Buru Masked Owl, T. (sororcula) cayelii - possibly extinct (mid-20th century?) { Manus Masked Owl, T. manusi } { Taliabu Masked Owl, T. nigrobrunnea } { Minahassa Masked Owl, T. inexspectata } { Sulawesi Owl, T. rosenbergii } Peleng Masked Owl, T. rosenbergii pelengensis - probably extinct (mid-20th century) { Barn Owl, T. alba } Eastern Barn Owl, T. (alba) delicatula { Ashy-faced Owl, T. glaucops } { Red Owl T. soumagnei } { African Grass Owl T. capensis } { Australasian Grass Owl T. longimembris } Genus Phodilus Samar Bay Owl P. (badius) riverae { Congo Bay Owl, P. prigoginei - sometimes placed in Tyto } Fossil genera Nocturnavis (Late Eocene/Early Oligocene) - includes &quot; Bubo &quot; incertus Necrobyas (Late Eocene/Early Oligocene - Late Miocene) - includes &quot; Bubo &quot; arvernensis and Paratyto Selenornis (Late Eocene/Early Oligocene of Quercy, France) - includes &quot; Asio &quot; henrici Prosybris (Late Eocene/Early Oligocene of Quercy? - Early Miocene of France) Placement unresolved Tytonidae gen. et sp. indet. &quot; TMT 164 &quot; (Middle Miocene of Grive-Saint-Alban, France) - Prosybris? Placement of the Late Eocene/Early Oligocene genera Palaeotyto and Palaeobyas from Quercy (France) in this family is tentative; they might belong to the Sophiornithidae instead. The supposed &quot; giant barn-owl &quot; Basityto from the Early Eocene of Grafenmühle (Germany) was actually a crowned crane (Balearica); [ December 2007 ] the presumed &quot; Easter Island Barn-owl &quot;, based on subfossil bones found on Rapa Nui, has turned out to be some procellarid (Steadman, 2006). [ References ] Bruce, M. D. (1999): Family Tytonidae (Barn-owls). In: del Hoyo, J.; Elliott, A. &amp; Sargatal, J. (eds): Handbook of Birds of the World, Volume 5: Barn-owls to Hummingbirds: 34-75, plates 1-3. Lynx Edicions, Barcelona. ISBN 84-87334-25-3 Steadman, David William (2006): Extinction and Biogeography of Tropical Pacific Islands Birds. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-77142-3. [ External links ] Barn-Owls on the Internet Bird Collection Category:Bird families Category:Owls * ar:بوم المخازن az:Alabayquşlar be:Сіпухавыя bg:Забулени сови ca:Titònid da:Slørugler de:Schleiereulen es:Tytonidae eo:Titonedoj fr:Tytonidae fy:Goudûlefûgels hr:Kukuvije it:Tytonidae he:תנשמתיים sw:Bundi (Tytonidae) lv:Plīvurpūču dzimta lt:Liepsnotosios pelėdos hu:Gyöngybagolyfélék nl:Kerkuilen ja:メンフクロウ科 frr:Türnüülen no:Slørugler nn:Slørugler pl:Płomykówkowate pt:Tytonidae ro:Tytonidae ru:Сипуховые sh:Kukuvije fi:Tornipöllöt sv:Tornugglor th:วงศ์นกแสก tr:Peçeli baykuşgiller uk:Сипухові vi:Họ Cú lợn zh:草鸮科