[ April 2012 ] [ Tutsi 65px 105px 120px 80px Paul Kagame • Renovat Ndayirukiye Richard Sezibera • Esther Kamatari 2.5 million (Rwanda and Burundi) Rwanda, Burundi, Eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo majority: Christianity, minority: Islam Rwanda-Rundi, French, English Hutu, Twa ] The Tutsi ( [ icon ˈ t ʊ t s i ]; [ Tutsi ] [ tūtsī Rwanda-Rundi pronunciation: ] ), or Abatutsi, are an ethnic group in Central Africa. Historically, they were often referred to as the Watutsi and the Wahuma. They are the second largest population division among the three largest groups in Rwanda and Burundi, the other two being the Hutu (largest) and the Twa (smallest). Small numbers of Hema, Kiga and Furiiru people also live in Rwanda. [ History ] A Tutsi man. Conceptions of the supposed ethnic groups in Rwanda and Burundi have a long history. The definitions of &quot; Hutu &quot; and &quot; Tutsi &quot; people may have changed through time and location. Social structures were not stable throughout Rwanda, even during colonial times under the Belgian rule. The Tutsi aristocracy or elite was distinguished from Tutsi commoners, and wealthy Hutu were often indistinguishable from upper-class Tutsi. When the European colonists conducted censuses, they wanted to identify the people throughout Rwanda-Burundi according to a simple classification scheme. They defined &quot; Tutsi &quot; as anyone owning more than ten cows (a sign of wealth) or with the physical feature of a longer nose, or longer neck, commonly associated with the Tutsi. A person could change from Hutu to Tutsi by obtaining enough cows to acquire the status. [ April 2012 ] The Europeans noticed that some Tutsis had facial characteristics that were generally atypical of other Bantus. They sought to explain these divergent physical traits by postulating admixture with or partial descent from migrants of Caucasoid stock, who usually were said to have arrived in the Great Lakes region from the Horn of Africa and/or North Africa. { International Institute of African Languages and Cultures, Africa, Volume 76, (Oxford University Press., 2006), pg 135. } Some Tutsi also believe they are descendants of the ancient Israelite s and had a mystical connection to Israel. { Josh Kron, &quot; Shooting star of the continent &quot;, Haaretz, 14 September 2010, accessed 14 September 2010 } By contrast, the Europeans considered the majority Hutu to be characteristic Bantu people of Central African origin. These various migration theories of foreign provenance were also in part inspired by the Tutsi&apos;s own long-held oral traditions asserting that they originally descended from &quot; white &quot; migrants, who subsequently &quot; lost &quot; their original language and culture as they intermarried with the local Bantus. The British explorer John Hanning Speke recorded one such account in his book Journal of the Discovery of the Source of the Nile: { John Hanning Speke, Journal of the discovery of the source of the Nile, (Harper &amp; brothers, 1868), pg 514. } &quot; The governor[...] said he thought the white men were flocking this way to retake their lost country; for tradition recorded that the Wahuma were once half black and half white, with half the hair straight and the other half curly; and how was this to be accounted for unless the country formerly belonged to white men with straight hair, but was subsequently taken by black men? &quot; Beginning about 1880, Roman Catholic missionaries arrived in the Great Lakes region. Later, when German forces occupied the area during World War I, the conflict and efforts for Catholic conversion became more pronounced. As the Tutsi resisted conversion, the missionaries found success only among the Hutu. In an effort to reward conversion, the colonial government confiscated traditionally Tutsi land and reassigned it to Hutu tribes, igniting a conflict that has lasted into the 21st century. [ http://www.kulanu.org/tutsi/jews-africa.php Irwin M. Berg Kulanu Highlights Jews in Central Africa 2010-03-17 ] [ Language ] Tutsis speak Rwanda-Rundi as their native tongue, which is a member of the Bantu subgroup of the Niger–Congo language family. Rwanda-Rundi is subdivided into the Kinyarwanda and Kirundi dialects, which have been standardized as official languages of Burundi and Rwanda. It is also spoken as a mother tongue by the Hutu and Twa. Additionally, many Tutsis speak French, the third official language of Rwanda and Burundi, as their lingua franca. [ Genetics ] Modern-day genetic studies of the Y-chromosome suggest that the Tutsi are largely of Bantu extraction (80% E1b1a, 15% B, 4% E3 ). Paternal genetic influences associated with the Horn of Africa and North Africa are few (1% E1b1b ), and are ascribed to much earlier inhabitants who were assimilated. The Tutsi, in general, demonstrate a close ethnic kinship with neighboring Bantu populations, particularly the Hutu. [ 10.1086/382286 1182266 The Levant versus the Horn of Africa: Evidence for Bidirectional Corridors of Human Migrations 14973781 2004 Luis J Rowold D Regueiro M Caeiro B Cinnioglu C Roseman C Underhill P Cavallisforza L Herrera R The American Journal of Human Genetics 74 3 532–44 ] [...]generations of gene flow obliterated whatever clear-cut physical distinctions may have once existed between these two Bantu peoples -- renowned to be height, body build, and facial features. With a spectrum of physical variation in the peoples, Belgian authorities legally mandated ethnic affiliation in the 1920s, based on economic criteria. Formal and discrete social divisions were consequently imposed upon ambiguous biological distinctions. To some extent, the permeability of these categories in the intervening decades helped to reify the biological distinctions, generating a taller elite and a shorter underclass, but with little relation to the gene pools that had existed a few centuries ago. The social categories are thus real, but there is little if any detectable genetic differentiation between Hutu and Tutsi. { Joseph C. Miller (ed.), New Encyclopedia of Africa, Volume 2, Dakar-Hydrology, Charles Scribner&apos;s Sons (publisher). } [ Culture ] { Rwanda classroom. } In the Rwanda territory, from the 15th century until 1961, the Tutsi were ruled by a king (the mwami). Belgium abolished the monarchy in response to Hutu activism, following the national referendum that led to independence. In the northwestern part of the country (predominantly Hutu), by contrast, the society more closely resembled that of Buganda n society (in what is now Uganda ); large regional landholders shared power instead of a central monarch. Little difference can be ascertained between the cultures of the Tutsi and Hutu; both groups speak the same Bantu language. The rate of intermarriage between the two groups has traditionally been very high, with historically amicable relations until the 20th century. Many scholars have concluded that the determination of Tutsi was and is mainly an expression of class or caste, rather than ethnicity. DNA studies, as noted above, show clearly that the peoples are more closely related to each other as Bantu than to any other. Differences have arisen due to social constructs, which create greater differences between the groups. During the 1980s, school principals reported that, although secondary school admissions were in accordance with quotas mandated by the Habyarimana government (in line with the proportions of the groups within the country), and by competition within ethnic groups, the students of Tutsi origin (14% of intake) comprised nearly 50%, on average, of those who graduated. This result provoked accusations of tribal favoritism. [ April 2012 ] [ Colonial influences ] Both Germany (before World War I ) and Belgium ruled the area in a colonial capacity. They allowed only the Tutsi to be educated and only they could participate in the colonial government. Such discriminatory policies engendered resentment. When the Belgians assumed control following World War I, they asked for advice from the Germans, who told them to continue promoting the Tutsis, which they did. [ October 2008 ] { Nyanza. } When the Belgians took over the colony in 1916, they believed the colony could be better governed if they continued to identify the different populations. In the 1920s, they required people to identify with a particular ethnic group and classified them in censuses. Belgian colonists viewed Africans in general as children [ February 2011 ] who needed to be guided, but noted the Tutsi to be the ruling culture in Rwanda-Burundi. In 1959, Belgium reversed its stance and allowed the majority Hutu to assume control of the government through universal elections. { Berlin. } The Hutu majority had revolted against the Tutsi but was unable to take power. Since the nation&apos;s independence, more extremist Tutsi came to power and oppressed the Hutu people, especially those who were educated. { Michael Bowen, Passing by;: The United States and genocide in Burundi, 1972, (Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 1973), p. 49 } { René Lemarchand, Selective genocide in Burundi (Report - Minority Rights Group; no. 20, 1974) } Rene Lemarchand, Burundi: Ethnic Conflict and Genocide (New York: Woodrow Wilson Center and Cambridge University Press, 1996) Edward L. Nyankanzi, Genocide: Rwanda and Burundi (Schenkman Books, 1998) { Christian P. Scherrer, Genocide and crisis in Central Africa: conflict roots, mass violence, and regional war; foreword by Robert Melson. Westport, Conn.: Praeger, 2002 } { Weissman, Stephen R. &quot; Preventing Genocide in Burundi Lessons from International Diplomacy &quot;, } { United States Institute of Peace } Their actions led to the deaths of up to 200,000 Hutus. { Christian Davenport and Allan Stam, &quot; Rwanda 1994: Genocide + Politicide &quot; } In 1993, Burundi&apos;s first democratically elected president, Melchior Ndadaye, a Hutu, was assassinated by Tutsi officers, as was the person entitled to succeed him under the constitution. { International Commission of Inquiry for Burundi: Final Report, Part III: Investigation of the Assassination. Conclusions at USIP.org } This sparked a period of civil strife between Hutu political structures and the Tutsi military, in which an estimated 800,000 Burundians, mostly Tutsi, were murdered. Since the 2000 Arusha Peace Process, today in Burundi the Tutsi minority shares power in a more or less equitable manner with the Hutu majority. Traditionally, the Tutsi had held more economic power and controlled the military. [ April 2012 ] { International Commission of Inquiry for Burundi (2002) } A similar pattern of events took place in Rwanda, but there the Hutu came to power in 1962. They in turn often oppressed the Tutsi, giving rise to Tutsi rebel movements. The exiled Tutsi attacked Rwanda in 1990 with the intention to liberate Rwanda. This lead later to a genocide started by the Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF) [ March 2012 ] which was to be continued by the Interahamwe. This culminated in the Hutu mass killings of Tutsi and Hutu in the Rwandan Genocide of 1994, in which the Hutu then in power killed an estimated 500,000–1,000,000 people, largely of Tutsi origin. Contemporary to these events in 1994, the RPF, constituted mostly from diasporic Tutsi in Uganda, had begun a strategic move on Rwandan territory from Uganda, where they had acquired significant experience of highly organized irregular warfare in the Ugandan Bush War. The RPF was also materially and substantially supported by the government in Uganda. The initial RPF advance was halted by the arms lift of French arms to the Rwandan government. Attempts at peace culminated in the Arusha Accords, which broke down in after the assassination of the Rwandan and Burundian Presidents. Victorious in the aftermath of the genocide, the RPF came to power in July 1994. The RPF killed numerous Hutus after taking power to revenge the genocide. [ Congolese Tutsi ] [ Banyamulenge ] { Banyamulenge and } { Bafuliru repairing a road between Lemera and Mulenge, } { South Kivu (ca. 2003). } In the eastern region of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), ethnic Tutsi formerly from Rwanda (Banyarwanda) are concentrated on the Itombwe Plateau of South Kivu, close to the Burundi-Congo-Rwanda border. Use of the term Banyamulenge has been controversial, but since the late 1990s following the Rwanda Genocide, it has been used to refer to all ethnic Tutsi living in North and South Kivu. Banyarwanda may have migrated from Rwanda as early as the seventeenth century. The first significant migration of Banyarwanda into South Kivu was recorded in the 1880s. Banyarwanda migrants continued to arrive during the colonial period, mostly as labor migrants. In the early 1970s, they began to call themselves Banyamulenge to avoid being called Banyarwanda and seen as foreigners, as they had been settled there with descendants for many generations. The Banyamulenge have an ambiguous political and social position in the Congo, which has been an issue of contention with other ethnic groups. They played a key role in the run-up to the First Congo War in 1996-7 and Second Congo War of 1998-2003. [ April 2012 ] [ References ] [ External links ] &quot; Tutsi &quot; at everyculture.com The International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (the status and judgments of all cases before the ICTR are available here) [ September 2010 ] * Category:Ethnic groups in Rwanda Category:Ethnic groups in the Democratic Republic of the Congo Category:Bantu ar:توتسي bn:টুট্‌সি bg:Тутси ca:Tutsis cs:Tutsiové cy:Tutsi da:Tutsi de:Tutsi et:Tutsid el:Τούτσι es:Tutsi eo:Tucioj eu:Tutsi fa:توتسی‌ها fr:Tutsis ko:투치족 id:Tutsi it:Tutsi he:טוטסי rw:Abatutsi la:Tutsi ms:Tutsi nl:Tutsi ja:ツチ pl:Tutsi pt:Tútsis ru:Тутси sr:Тутси sh:Tutsi fi:Tutsit sv:Tutsier ta:துட்சி இனக்குழு tr:Tutsiler uk:Тутсі yo:Tutsi zh:图西族