[ the distillate obtained from rose petals the place Rosewater, South Australia ] [ Golab Polish places and surnames Gołąb (disambiguation) for the villages in Iran Golab-e Bala and Golab-e Pain ] A bottle of Turkish rose water Rose water is the hydrosol portion of the distillate of rose petal s. Rose water, itself a by-product of the production of rose oil for use in perfume, is used to flavour food, as a component in some cosmetic and medical preparations, and for religious purposes throughout Europe and Asia. Rose syrup is made from rose water, with sugar added. [ Origin ] Since ancient times, the rose has been highly prized for its source of perfume, medicinal use and nutritional properties. In fact so much so that, ancient Greeks, Romans and Phoenecians placed as much importance on large public rose gardens as they did on wheat fields and fruit orchards. { The rose in Ancient times } Rose perfumes are made from rose oil, also called attar of roses, which is a mixture of volatile essential oil s obtained by steam-distilling the crushed petals of roses, a process first developed in Persia and Bulgaria. [ July 2011 ] Rose water is a by-product of this process. [ In other cultures ] Rose water has a very distinctive flavour and is used heavily in Iranian cuisine —especially in sweets such as nougat, raahat and baklava. For example, rose water is used to give gulab jamun s and some types of loukoum (or &quot; Turkish Delight &quot; ) their distinctive flavours. Beside food usage, they used it as perfume especially in religious ceremonies (both Muslim s and Zoroastrian s ). The Cypriot version of mahleb uses rosewater. { http://kopiaste.org/2008/10/mahalebi-with-caramelized-pistachios/ } In Iran, it is also added to tea, ice cream, cookies and other sweets in small quantities, and in the Arab world and India it is used to flavour milk and dairy-based dishes such as rice pudding. It is also a key ingredient in sweet lassi, a drink made from yogurt, sugar and various fruit juices, and is also used to make jallab. In Malaysia and Singapore, rose water is mixed with milk, sugar and pink food colouring to make a sweet drink called bandung. Rose water is frequently used as a halal substitute for red wine and other alcohols in cooking. In Western Europe, rose water (as well as orange flower water ) is sometimes used to flavour marzipan. Rose water was also used to make Waverly Jumbles, a type of cookie much favoured by the American President James Monroe. American and European bakers enjoyed the floral flavouring of rose water in their baking until the 19th century when vanilla flavouring became popular. In the United States, rose syrup is used to make rose scones and marshmallow s. A rose water ointment is occasionally used as an emollient, and rose water is sometimes used in cosmetics such as cold cream s. Water used to clean the Kaaba, the Qibla for Muslims located in Mecca, combines Zamzam water with rose water as an additive. Rose water is used in some Hindu rituals as well. Rose water also figures in Christianity, particularly in the Eastern Orthodox Church. Rose water was first produced by Muslim chemists in the medieval Islamic world through the distillation of roses, for use in the drinking and perfumery industries. { Ahmad Y Hassan, Transfer Of Islamic Technology To The West, Part III: Technology Transfer in the Chemical Industries, History of Science and Technology in Islam. } In parts of the Middle East, rose water is commonly added to lemonade. In India, rose water is used as eye drops to clear them. Some people in India also use rose water as spray applied directly to the face for natural fragrance and moisturiser, especially during winters. It is also used in Indian sweets and other food preparations. Rose water is often sprinkled in Indian weddings to welcome guests. [ Composition ] Depending on the origin and type of manufacturing method of rosewater obtained from the sepals and petals of Rosa damascena from Central Iran through steam distillation, the following monoterpenoid and alkane components could be identified with GC-MS : mostly citronellol, nonadecane, geraniol and phenyl ethyl alcohol, and also henicosane, 9-nonadecen, eicosane, linalool, citronellyl acetate, methyleugenol, heptadecane, pentadecane, docosane, nerol, disiloxane, octadecane, and pentacosane.Usually, phenylethyl alcohol is responsible for the typical odour of rose water but not always present in rosewater products. { Loghmani-Khouzani H, Fini Sabzi O, Safari J H (2007). “Essential Oil Composition of Rosa damascena”. Scientia Iranica 14 (4), pp 316-319. Sharif University of Technology, Research Note } [ See also ] Damascus rose water Rose history by Rosense UK [ References ] [ External links ] Oman’s Rose Water in Jebel Akhdar Category:Ancient Greek cuisine Category:Greek cuisine Category:Arab cuisine Category:Food ingredients Category:Middle Eastern cuisine Category:Iranian cuisine Category:Cypriot cuisine Category:Roses Category:Syrup Category:Herbal distillates Category:Azerbaijani cuisine ar:ماء ورد ca:Aigua de roses de:Rosenwasser es:Agua de rosas fa:گلاب fr:Eau de rose hi:गुलाब जल it:Acqua di rose he:מי ורדים ku:Gulav ml:അത്തർ no:Rosenvann pl:Woda różana pt:Água de rosas ru:Розовая вода sv:Rosenvatten ta:பன்னீர் tr:Gül suyu ur:عرق گلاب zh:玫瑰香水