[ Festivity the ship MV Festivity ] [ January 2009 ] { Somerset, } { United Kingdom } Village Feast.--Fac-simile of a Woodcut of the &quot; Sandrin ou Verd Galant, &quot; facetious Work of the End of the Sixteenth Century (edition of 1609). A festival or gala is an event, usually and ordinarily staged by a local community, which centers on and celebrates some unique aspect of that community and the Festival. Among many religion s, a feast is a set of celebrations in honour of God or gods. A feast and a festival are historically interchangeable. However, the term &quot; feast &quot; has also entered common secular parlance as a synonym for any large or elaborate meal. When used as in the meaning of a festival, most often refers to a religious festival rather than a film or art festival. In the Christian liturgical calendar there are two principal feasts, properly known as the Feast of the Nativity of our Lord ( Christmas ) and the Feast of the Resurrection, ( Easter ). In the Catholic, Eastern Orthodox, and Anglican liturgical calendars there are a great number of lesser feasts throughout the year commemorating saints, sacred events, doctrines, etc. [ Etymology ] The word fest derives from the Middle English, from Middle French word festivus, from the Latin word festivus. Festival was first recorded as a noun in 1589. Before it had been used as an adjective from the fourteenth century, meaning to celebrate a church holiday. The etymology of feast is very similar to that of festival. The word &quot; feste &quot; comes from Middle English, from Middle French, from the Latin word festa. Feast first came into usage as a noun circa 1200, and feast was used as a verb circa 1300. [ http://www.etymonline.com/index.php?term%3Dfeast Etymology of &quot; feast &quot;, etymonline.com March 9, 2006 ] A festival is a special occasion of feasting or celebration, that is usually religious. There can be many different types of festivals, like Halloween, Saturnellia, and Christmas. [ Function ] Festivals, of many types, serve to meet specific needs, as well as to provide entertainment. These times of celebration offer a sense of belonging for religious, social, or geographical groups. Modern festivals that focus on cultural or ethnic topics seek to inform members of their traditions. In past times, festivals were times when the elderly shared stories and transferred certain knowledge to the next generation. Historic feasts often provided a means for unity among families and for people to find mates. Select anniversaries have annual festivals to commemorate previous significant occurrences. [ Types of festivals ] There are numerous types of festivals in the world. Though many have religious origins, others involve seasonal change or have some cultural significance. [ http://www.efi-news.com/2011/10/whacked-out-festivals-part-1.html Whacked Out Festivals, efi-news.com October 21, 2011 ] Also, certain institutions celebrate their own festival (often called &quot; fests &quot; ) to mark some significant occasions in their history. These occasions could be the day these institutions were founded or any other event which they decide to commemorate periodically, usually annually. [ Seasonal festivals ] Seasonal festivals are determined by the [solar calendar|solar] and the lunar calendar s and by the cycle of the season s. The changing of the season was celebrated because of its effect on food supply. Ancient Egyptians would celebrate the seasonal inundation caused by the Nile River, a form of irrigation, which provided fertile land for crops. In the Alps, in autumn the return of the cattle from the mountain pasture s to the stables in the valley is celebrated as Almabtrieb. A recognized winter festival, the Chinese New Year, is set by the lunar calendar, and celebrated from the day of the second new moon after the winter solstice. An important type of seasonal festivals are those related with the agricultural seasons. Dree Festival of the Apatanis living in Lower Subansiri District of Arunachal Pradesh is one such important festival, which is celebrated every year from July 4 to 7 praying for bumper crop harvest. [ General ] [ :Category:Festivals ] Arts festival Beer festival Comedy festival Japanese Cultural festival Esala Perahera festival Film festival Fire festival Folk festival Food festival Literary festival Mela Festival Music festival Oyster Festival Peanut Festival Ribfest Religious festival Renaissance festival Rock festival Science festival Sindhi festivals Storytelling festival Theatre festival Wine festivals Winter festivals Gorlero Fest [ Lists of festivals ] [ List of festivals ] [ Ancient Egyptian festivals ] Most Ancient Egypt ian festivals were religious, but others were not such as one festival established by Rameses III to celebrate his victory over the Libyans. When feasts occurred, they were either determined by lunar cycles or the Egyptian calendar. Festivals were large celebrations with plenty of food available. In one festival in the 12th century BC, 11,341 loaves of bread and 385 jars of beer were given to the public. The Sed festival celebrated the thirtieth year of a pharaoh &apos;s rule and then every three (or four in one case) years after that.Iranian traditional festivals:Mehregan festival, Norooz or nuroz festival, qadir festival, Chahar shanbehesori festival.Islamic festivals:EId-ul-Adha festival (biggest Islamic festival) and Id-ul-Fiter festival is another Islamic festival (second-biggest). [ See also ] [ fest Festival ] [ Festivals ] [ Outline of festivals ] Convention Event planning Fair Festive ecology Holiday List of festivals in the United States List of music festivals Liturgical year Moveable feast Trade show [ Notes ] [ August 2010 ] Category:Social events ar:مهرجان arc:ܥܕܥܐܕܐ as:উৎসৱ bn:উৎসব be:Фестываль be-x-old:Фэстываль bg:Фестивал bo:དུས་ཆེན། bs:Festival br:Gouel-meur ca:Festival cs:Festival da:Festival de:Festival es:Festival eo:Festivalo eu:Jaialdi fa:جشنواره fr:Festival ko:축제 hi:उत्सव hr:Festival id:Festival is:Hátíð it:Festival (antropologia) he:פסטיבל kn:ಹಬ್ಬ hu:Fesztivál ml:ഉത്സവം mr:उत्सव nl:Festival ne:उत्सव new:नख: no:Festival nn:Festival or:ପର୍ବ pl:Festiwal pt:Festival rue:Фестівал ru:Фестиваль sa:भारतीयपर्वाणि simple:Festival sk:Festival sr:Фестивал sh:Festival fi:Festivaali sv:Festival ta:திருவிழா te:పండుగ chr:ᏓᎾᎵᏍᏓᏴᎲᏍᎬ tr:Festival uk:Фестиваль vi:Lễ hội zh-yue:節 zh:节日