[ Welwitchia.jpg Welwitschia mirabilis Hook.f. Caruel Welwitschia mirabilis Hook.f. Welwitschia Mirabilis Area of Circulation.png Range ] &lt; center &gt; Female cones Welwitschia is a monotypic genus of gymnosperm plant, comprising solely the very distinct Welwitschia mirabilis. In English the plant commonly is known simply as Welwitschia. It has various common names in local languages, for example kharos or khurub in Nama, tweeblaarkanniedood in Afrikaans, nyanka in Damara, and onyanga in Herero. It is the only genus of the family Welwitschiaceae and order Welwitschiales, in the division Gnetophyta. Informal sources commonly refer to the plant as a &quot; living fossil &quot;. { Flowering Plants of Africa 57:2-8(2001) } [ A. Lewington &amp; E. Parker Ancient Trees: Trees that Live for a Thousand Years 1999 Collins &amp; Brown Ltd. 1-85585-704-9 ] Welwitschia is named after the Austrian botanist Friedrich Welwitsch who discovered it in 1859. Welwitschia mirabilis is endemic to the Namib desert within Namibia and Angola. [ Biology ] Welwitschia grows from a short, thick, woody trunk with a thick taproot that has been variously described as long and short. Bornmann appears to have investigated the matter more intimately at first hand than most authors, and describes the root system as &quot; rather shallow and simple, consisting of a tapering taproot with one or more non-tapering extensions, some pronounced lateral roots, and a network of delicate spongy roots. &quot; He offers the guideline that the roots extend to a depth roughly equal to the span of the living leaves from tip to tip. [ Bornman Chris Welwitschia Struik Cape Town 1978 0-86977-097-7 ] After germination, the cotyledon s grow to 25 –35  mm in length, and are followed shortly afterward by the appearance of two permanent leaves. These leaves are produced at right angles to the cotyledons, and continue to grow throughout the entire life of the plant; they are the only leaves that the plant will bear, because the stem is acephalous; its apical meristem dies after the first two leaves are produced. Those two leaves grow continuously from a basal meristem in the plant&apos;s terminal groove. They eventually grow to a length of 2 –4 m and usually become split, frayed and shredded into several well-separated strap-shaped sections by the distortions of the woody portions surrounding the apical slit, and also by wind and adventitious external injuries. { Welwitschia and Ephedra: Remarkable Genera Of Gymnosperms } The growth of the leaves outstrips that of the cotyledons after about four months, after which the growing tips of the two cotyledons die, but their bases continue to grow sideways. That lateral growth leads the obconical extension of the stem which produces the terminal groove from which the leaves grow. The species is dioecious, with separate male and female plants. Fertilization, that is, the transfer of the pollen from the male to the female strobili, is carried out by insects. The insects responsible include flies and true bugs. The commonest of the true bugs attending Welwitschia is a member of the family Pyrrhocoridae : Odontopus sexpunctatus. The genus also is known as Probergrothius and the matter of which name is correct is still under discussion. { Robertson IAD. 2004. The Pyrrhocoroidea (Hemiptera – Heteroptera) of the Ethiopian region. 44pp. Journal of Insect Science, 4:14, Available online: insectscience.org/4.14 } Infrequently, wasps and bees also play a role as pollinators of Welwitschia. At least some of the pollinators are attracted by &quot; nectar &quot; produced on both male and female strobili. [ Wetschnig W, Depisch B 1999 [Chrysomya albiceps Pollination biology of Welwitschia mirabilisHOOK. f. (Welwitschiaceae, Gnetopsida)] Phyton-Annales Rei Botanicae 39 167 ] The age of the plants is difficult to assess, but they are very long-lived, living 1000 years or more. Some individuals may be more than 2000 years old. The plant absorbs water through structures on its leaves, harvesting moisture originating from Namib desert morning fogs that blow in during the night, comprising the main source of water for much of the desert life. It is possible that W. mirabilis uses crassulacean acid metabolism (CAM) photosynthesis; if this were true, W. mirabilis would be the only known gymnosperm to do so. However, the evidence is contradictory. [ Winter K, Schramm MJ 1986 Analysis of Stomatal and Nonstomatal Components in the Environmental Control of CO2 Exchange in Leaves of Welwitschia mirabilis Plant Physiology 82 173–8 10.1104/pp.82.1.173 16664987 1 1056085 ] Although considered endangered due to its very slow growth and despite the fact that older plants are often sought by collectors, a fair number of plants exist in the wild. The plants living in Angola are better protected than the plants in Namibia, owing to the relatively high concentration of land mine s in Angola, which keep collectors away [ February 2007 ]. The species grows readily from seed, which may be purchased from specialty seed dealers. The seed must be kept moist for the first couple of weeks and exposed to as much heat and light as possible during this time. Seeds collected from the wild are often heavily contaminated with spores of the mold Aspergillus niger, which causes them to rot shortly after they germinate. Seeds from botanical gardens, or other cultivated sources are much cleaner and less likely to rot. It is suggested that the seeds might contain a germination inhibitor that prevents germination until the substance has been leached out by plentiful water. This is a common strategy among desert plants and is consistent with the observation that one commonly encounters communities of Welwitschia plants of apparently more or less the same age. It is reasonable to suspect that they had germinated at about the same time during unusual episodes of wetness in the desert. [ Scientific classification ] The taxonomic placement of Welwitschia has changed many times with the development of new classification systems (see Flowering plants: History of classification ). Most botanists have treated Welwitschia as a distinct monotypic genus in a monotypic family or even order. Most recent systems place Welwitschia mirabilis in its own family Welwitschiaceae in the gymnosperm order Gnetales. { Stevens, P. F. (2001 onwards). Angiosperm Phylogeny Website. Version 9, June 2008 http://www.mobot.org/MOBOT/research/APWeb/ } The order Gnetales is most closely related to the order Pinales, which includes pines, spruces, larches and firs { Christenhusz, M.J.M., J.L. Reveal, A. Farjon, M.F. Gardner, R.R. Mill, and M.W. Chase (2011). A new classification and linear sequence of extant gymnosperms. Phytotaxa 19:55-70. http://www.mapress.com/phytotaxa/content/2011/f/pt00019p070.pdf } The species is sometimes given the name Welwitschia bainesii to honour its co-discoverer, Thomas Baines. { http://www.plantzafrica.com/plantwxyz/welwitschia.htm } [ Heraldry ] The plant figures as a charge in the national coat of arms of Namibia, as well as that of Westelike Rugby Subunie. [ Gallery ] The largest known Welwitschia, nicknamed &quot; The Big Welwitschia &quot;, stands 1.4 m tall and is over 4 m in diameter Female plant Detail photograph of ripe female cones after seed dispersal Detail photograph of male plant and cones Proportions [ See also ] List of Southern African indigenous trees and woody lianes [ References ] [ External links ] [ Welwitschia ] [ Welwitschia mirabilis Welwitschia ] Gymnosperm database: &apos;&apos;Welwitschia&apos;&apos; Ecology &amp; Evolutionary Biology Conservatory The Welwitschia Page: photos of Welwitschia in the wild Welwitschia mirabilis Category:Endangered species Category:Flora of Angola Category:Flora of Southern Africa Category:Gnetophyta Category:Living fossils Category:Monotypic plant genera Category:Dioecious plants Category:Flora of Namibia [ de ] af:Welwitschia ar:فلفيتشيا az:Qəribə valvisiya bg:Велвичия ca:Welwítsquia cs:Welwitschie podivná da:Welwitschia de:Welwitschie et:Velvitšia es:Welwitschia mirabilis eo:Velviĉio eu:Welwitschia fa:ویلوچیا fr:Welwitschia mirabilis ko:웰위치아 hsb:Prawa welwićija it:Welwitschia mirabilis he:ולויטשיה ka:ველვიჩია kk:Таңғажайып вельвичия kv:Вельвичия mrj:Вельвичи la:Welwitschia lt:Nuostabioji velvičija hu:Velvícsia ml:വെൽവിറ്റ്ഷിയ മിരാബിലിസ് mdf:Вельвичия nl:Welwitschia ja:ウェルウィッチア no:Welwitschia mirabilis koi:Вельвичия pl:Welwiczja przedziwna pt:Welwitschia ro:Welwitschia mirabilis ru:Вельвичия simple:Welwitschia fi:Ikilehti sv:Welwitschia roa-tara:Welwitschia mirabilis udm:Вельвичия uk:Вельвічія дивна zh:百歲蘭