The Lateran Treaty was one of the Lateran Pacts of 1929 or Lateran Accords, agreements made in 1929 between the Kingdom of Italy and the Holy See, and ratified June 7, 1929, ending the &quot; Roman Question &quot;. Italy was then under a Fascist government; the succeeding democratic governments have all upheld the treaty. The pacts consisted of two documents, with four annexes: { Pacts between the Holy See and the Kingdom of Italy, 11 February 1929 } A plan of the territory of the Vatican City State A list and plans of the buildings with extraterritorial privilege and exemption from expropriation and taxes A list and plans of the buildings with exemption from expropriation and taxes A financial convention agreed on as a definitive settlement of the claims of the Holy See following the loss of its territories and property { A } { concordat regulating relations between the } { Catholic Church and the Italian state } [ History ] Territory of Vatican City State, established by the Lateran Accords Negotiations for the settlement of the Roman Question began in 1926 between the government of Italy and the Holy See, and culminated in the agreements of the Lateran Pacts, signed - the Treaty says { Preamble of the Lateran Treaty } - for King Victor Emmanuel III of Italy by Benito Mussolini, Prime Minister and Head of Government, and for Pope Pius XI by Pietro Gasparri, Cardinal Secretary of State, on February 11, 1929. The agreements were signed in the Lateran Palace, hence the name by which they are known. The agreements included a political treaty which created the state of the Vatican City and guaranteed full and independent sovereignty to the Holy See. The Pope was pledged to perpetual neutrality in international relations and to abstention from mediation in a controversy unless specifically requested by all parties. In the first article of the treaty, Italy reaffirmed the principle established in the 4 March 1848 Statute of the Kingdom of Italy, that &quot; the Catholic, Apostolic and Roman Religion is the only religion of the State &quot;. { Lateran Treaty, article 1 } The attached financial agreement was accepted as settlement of all the claims of the Holy See against Italy arising from the loss of temporal power in 1870. { Francesco Pacelli was the right-hand man for } { Pietro Gasparri during the Lateran Treaty negotiations } The sum thereby given to the Holy See was actually less than Italy declared it would pay under the terms of the Law of Guarantees of 1871, by which the Italian government guaranteed to Pope Pius IX and his successors the use of, but not sovereignty over, the Vatican and Lateran Palaces and a yearly income of 3,250,000 lire as indemnity for the loss of sovereignty and territory. The Holy See, on the grounds of the need for clearly manifested independence from any political power in its exercise of spiritual jurisdiction, had refused to accept the settlement offered in 1871, and the Popes thereafter until the signing of the Lateran Treaty considered themselves prisoners in the Vatican, a small, limited area inside Rome. To commemorate the successful conclusion of the negotiations, Mussolini commissioned the Via della Conciliazione (Road of the Conciliation), which would symbolically link the Vatican City to the heart of Rome. The Constitution of the Italian Republic, adopted in 1947, states that relations between the State and the Catholic Church &quot; are regulated by the Lateran Treaties &quot;. { The Constitution of the Italian Republic, article 7 } In 1984 an agreement was signed, revising the concordat. Among other things, it ended the Church&apos;s position as the state-supported religion of Italy, replacing the state financing with a personal income tax called the otto per mille. In 2008, it was announced that the Vatican would no longer immediately adopt all Italian laws, citing conflict over right-to-life issues following the trial and ruling of the Eluana Englaro case. [ http://www.reuters.com/article/worldNews/idUSTRE4BU3BD20081231 Vatican ends automatic adoption of Italian law Elgood Giles 2008-12-31 Reuters The Vatican will no longer automatically adopt new Italian laws as its own, a top Vatican official said, citing the vast number of laws Italy churns out, many of which are in odds with Catholic doctrine. 2009-01-09 ] [ Violations ] Italy&apos;s anti-Jewish laws of 1938 prohibited marriages between Jews and non-Jews, including Catholics. The Vatican viewed this as a violation of the Concordat, which gave the church the sole right to regulate marriages involving Catholics. { Zuccotti, 2000, p. 37. } Article 34 of the Concordat also had specified that marriages performed by the Catholic Church would always be considered valid by civil authorities. { Zuccotti, 2000, p. 48. } The Vatican understood this to include Matrimony between non-Aryan Catholics or between one Aryan and a non-Aryan. [ See also ] Holy See Vatican City Prisoner in the Vatican Properties of the Holy See Concordat with Germany [ References ] [ Bibliography ] [ Riccards Michael Vicars of Christ: Popes, Power, and Politics in the Modern World Crossroad New York 1998 0-8245-1694-X ] [ Zuccotti Susan Under His Very Windows: The Vatican and the Holocaust in Italy Yale University Press New Haven 2002 0-300-09310-1 ] [ Notes ] [ 30em ] [ External links ] Text of the Lateran Treaty and other laws and decrees related to Vatican City State Text in the original language of the Lateran Pacts, including the financial convention and the concordat Category:History of Catholicism in Italy Category:History of Rome Category:Treaties of the Holy See Category:Government of Vatican City Category:Vatican City law Category:Contemporary Italian history Category:1929 in Italy Category:Pope Pius XI Category:Treaties concluded in 1929 Category:Treaties entered into force in 1929 Category:Italy–Vatican City border Category:Treaties of the Kingdom of Italy (1861–1946) ar:اتفاقية لاتران ast:Pautos del Laterano be:Латэранскія пагадненні bg:Латерански договори ca:Pactes del Laterà cs:Lateránské smlouvy da:Laterantraktaten de:Lateranverträge es:Pactos de Letrán eo:Lateranaj Traktatoj fr:Accords du Latran gl:Pactos Lateranenses ko:라테란 조약 hr:Lateranski ugovori id:Perjanjian Lateran it:Patti Lateranensi he:ההסכמים הלטרניים ka:ლატერანის ხელშეკრულება la:Lateranensia pacta lt:Laterano susitarimas hu:Lateráni egyezmény ms:Perjanjian Lateran nl:Verdrag van Lateranen ja:ラテラノ条約 no:Lateranoverenskomsten pl:Traktaty laterańskie pt:Tratado de Latrão ru:Латеранские соглашения sk:Lateránske zmluvy fi:Lateraanisopimukset sv:Lateranfördraget th:สนธิสัญญาลาเตรัน tr:Laterano Antlaşması uk:Латеранські угоди vi:Hiệp ước Latêranô zh:拉特兰条约