[ QuarkXPress 64px center QuarkXPress 9.0 on Windows 7 Quark, Inc. 1987 yes Mac OS X and Microsoft Windows multilingual Desktop publishing Proprietary ] QuarkXPress (often referred to as Quark) is a computer application for creating and editing complex page layouts in a WYSIWYG (What You See Is What You Get) environment. It runs on Mac OS X and Windows. It was first released by Quark, Inc. in 1987 and is still owned and published by them. The most recent version, QuarkXPress 9, allows publishing in English ( &quot; International and U.S. &quot; { http://www.quark.com/products/xpress/international.html } ) and 36 other languages, including Arabic, Chinese, Japanese, Portuguese, German, Korean, Russian, French, and Spanish. { http://8.quark.com/languages.html } QuarkXPress is used by individual designers and large publishing houses to produce a variety of layouts, from single-page flyers to the multi-media projects required for magazines, newspapers, catalogs, and the like. QuarkXPress once dominated the market for page layout software with over 95% market share among professional users. While one publisher estimates that share has fallen to below 25% and Adobe InDesign is now the market leader, QuarkXPress still has significant marketshare. [ Barrett Amy Can Quark Turn the Corner? http://www.inc.com/magazine/20100401/can-quark-turn-the-corner.html April 5, 2010 Inc. Magazine Apri; 5, 2010 ] There are open source competitors in the page layout space, the most notable of which is Scribus. Version 8 screenshot [ History ] The first version of QuarkXPress was released in 1987 for the Macintosh. A Microsoft Windows version (3.1) followed in 1992. In the 1990s, QuarkXPress quickly became widely used by professional page designers, the typesetting industry and printers. In particular, the Mac version of 3.3 (released in 1996) was seen as stable and trouble-free, working seamlessly with Adobe&apos;s PostScript fonts as well as with Apple&apos;s TrueType fonts. Early on, QuarkXPress incorporated an application programming interface called XTension s which allows third-party developers to create custom add-on features to the desktop application. Introduced in 1989, Xtensions, along with Apple Computer &apos;s HyperCard, were among the first examples of a developer allowing others to create software add-ons for their application. After having released QuarkXPress 3.3, QuarkXPress was seen as needing significant improvements and users criticized it for its overly long innovation cycles. The release of QuarkXPress version 5 in 2002 led to a conflict with Apple&apos;s user base, as QuarkXPress did not support Mac OS X, while InDesign 2.0, launched in the same week, did. Only with Version 6 QuarkXPress support Mac OS X, however the first really adopted version was QuarkXPress 7 (which was also a Universal Binary application). Quark started to lower its pricing levels in 2004. In December 2006, Quark licensed the Windows version of QuarkXPress 5 to be distributed free of charge on the cover of a UK computer magazine, Computer Shopper, with the idea of enticing consumers to upgrade to later versions. Having arrived late with a Mac OS X version, Quark took a different approach to porting to Intel-native applications on Mac (Universal Binary), and released its Universal Binary version 10 months before Adobe ported InDesign. { Quark 7 goes Universal } With QuarkXPress 8 and 9 the product seems to listen more to its user base, as reviews worldwide became more positive and several Mac magazines gave awards to QuarkXPress, even best product of the year (MacWorld Awards 2011: Grand Prix Winner ). [ Use and features ] In addition to the basic functionality of font, alignment, spacing, and color, the package also provides its users with professional typesetting options like kerning, curving text along a line, and ligatures. A QuarkXPress document contains text and graphics boxes. The boxes can be reshaped, layered, and given varying levels of transparency and text alignment ( runaround ). [ http://www.design.iastate.edu/LABS/tutorials/quarkxpress/qx0001.html Ia. State QuarkXpress Tutorial 2010-06-07 ] Both box positioning and graphic or text positioning is allowed within a box with an accuracy of one-thousandth of an inch. Color control allows the full-use of printing-press standard Pantone or Hexachrome inks, along with a variety of other color-space options. Draft output can be printed on conventional desktop printers. Process color ( CMYK ) separation films can be produced for printing-presses. QuarkXPress also offers the ability for composite work-flows, both with PostScript and PDF output. QuarkXPress offers layout synchronization, multiple undo/redo functionality, XML and web page ( HTML / XHTML ) features, and support for direct PDF import and output. Documents can be verified ( &apos;&apos;pre-flight&apos;&apos; ) before printing. This high-level print preview automatically identifies conflicts and other printing problems. Since then Adobe has implemented a similar feature in InDesign CS4. Composition zones feature makes it the only desktop application with multi-user capabilities by allowing multiple users to edit different zones on the same page. Composition Zones pushes collaboration a step further than just simultaneous text/picture (as possible with QuarkCopyDesk since 1991), as it allows layout and graphic elements to be edited outside the layout application. User-defined rules, output specs and layout specs can be used for intelligent templates and enable resource sharing (for example, server-based style sheet definitions). Version 6.5, released at the end of 2004, added enhanced support for the Photoshop format (PSD). The PSD integration and picture manipulation features led to QuarkXPress receiving a number of awards, such as the Macworld Editor&apos;s Choice for 2004. Version 7 added support for OpenType, Unicode, JDF and also PDF/X -export. QuarkXPress 7 also added unique features, such as native transparency at the color level. QuarkXPress 8 introduced a completely new user interface, support for drag and drop, PDF 1.7 import, AI Import and a global file format. Design grids can be assigned to pages and boxes to allow unlimited baseline grids. Hanging characters can be applied and customized by character and amount to hang outside the box. This is the first version to include built-in Adobe Flash authoring. Designers can create Flash content including sound, video, animation and interactivity without programming. In October 2008, QuarkXPress 8 won the MacUser Award for Print Publishing Software of the Year. { MacUser names 2008 Awards winners } With the current version 9 QuarkXPress extended its crossmedia publishing approach and can be used now to also export to eBooks ( ePub 3 and Blio ) and native apps (for the iPad ). With App Studio, which is shipped with QuarkXPress, designers can even create and design their own apps. Additionally QuarkXPress 9 offes cascading styles (stylesheets based on text content), callouts (anchored objects that flow with the text based on position rules), create complex ad editable Bézier paths using a wizard (ShapeMaker), bullets and numbers (with import &amp; export from/to Microsoft Word ) and more. The Mac version of QuarkXPress 9 is for Intel processors only, making QuarkXPress 8.5.1 the last choice for PPC-based Macs. [ Server version ] In the beginning of 2003 Quark released a server version of QuarkXPress, { Quark Dynamic Document Server Launched } called QuarkDDS. This enables page editing and page layout in a web browser. QuarkXPress Server is often used for web-to-print in corporate intranets to enable customization and ordering of printed materials, advertising automation workflows in advertising agencies, catalog generation for retailers and variable digital printing for personalized marketing. It enables companies to print copies digitally when they need them, often with customized content. The system relies on XML. The server is often embedded in print on demand software. In 2006 Quark renamed QuarkDDS to &quot; QuarkXPress Server &quot;. { Quark announces Print Collection and QuarkXPress Server 7 } [ Version history ] QuarkXPress 2.1 (1989) - Enhanced typographic control, such as user-definable kerning tables. { QuarkXPress 3 (1990) - First version with measurement palette and support for libraries. } QuarkXPress 3.1 (1992) - First version to also support Windows. QuarkXPress 3.2 (1993) - First version to support Applescript and color management. QuarkXPress 3.3 (1996) - First version to support PPC natively. First Passport Version (optional). QuarkXPress 3.32 (1996) - Support for QuarkImmedia. This is the last version which works on Windows 3.x (requires Win32s to be installed). { QuarkXPress 4 (1997) - First version with bezier curves. Notable interface improvements are pop-up tools and tabbed dialog boxes. Windows 3.x is no longer supported. } QuarkXPress 4.1 (1999) - First version to also support PDF and XML. { QuarkXPress 5 (2002) - First version to offer tables and export } { HTML. } { QuarkXPress Server (QuarkDDS) released. } { QuarkXPress 6 (2003) - First version to support } { Mac OS X. } QuarkXPress 6.1 (2004) - First version with Excel Import filter. QuarkXPress 6.5 (2004) - First version to also support the Document Object Model and picture retouching features. QuarkXPress 6.52 (2006) - Bug fix release, released after release of Quark 7. { QuarkXPress 7 (2006) - First version to support OpenType, Unicode, PDF/X, Shadows/Transparencies, } { Job Definition Format and Composition Zones. } QuarkXPress 7.01 (8 August 2006) - First native version for Intel Macs (Universal binary), plus PPML support. QuarkXPress 7.02 (2006) - Additional language support in Passport. QuarkXPress 7.1 (2007) - Performance update. QuarkXPress 7.2 (2007) - First version to support Windows Vista, additional languages. QuarkXPress 7.3 (2007) - Increased UI localization and PDF support, improved performance and stability. QuarkXPress 7.31 (2007) - Certification on Windows Vista, support for Mac OS X v10.5 ( &quot; Leopard &quot; ), enhancements to spell checking. QuarkXPress 7.4 (2008) - non public release, only for QPS customers. QuarkXPress 7.5 (2008) - Bug fix release, released after release of Quark 8. { QuarkXPress 8 (2008) - New UI, drag-and-drop support, direct image manipulation, customizable optical margin alignment, multiple baseline grids, East Asian support, built-in Flash authoring. } QuarkXPress 8.01 (2008) - Spellchecker enhancements QuarkXPress 8.02 (2009) - Five new languages and new Pantone libraries. QuarkXPress 8.1 (2009) - Numerical scale, native transparency ( PDF-X/4 ) and layers in PDF, improved spell checker and other feature improvements. Supports Snow Leopard and Windows 7. QuarkXPress 8.12 (2009) - Bug fix release. QuarkXPress 8.15 (2010) (Mac OS X only) - Fixes activation issues on certain Apple hardware. QuarkXPress 8.1.6 (2010) - Speed optimizations QuarkXPress 8.1.6.2 (2010) - Bug fix release. QuarkXPress 8.5 (2010) - Bug fixes, auto updater, DOCX import. QuarkXPress 8.5.1 (2011) - Bug fixes, last Universal Binary version. { QuarkXPress 9 (2011) - Nested Styles, callouts (anchored elements outside text boxes), bullets &amp; numbers, shape wizard, multi image import, ePub Export. } QuarkXPress 9.0.1 (2011) - Bug fix release QuarkXPress 9.1 (2011) - Addition of &quot; App Studio &quot;, which allows to export multimedia apps for iPad out of QuarkXPress. First version to officially support Mac OS X Lion QuarkXPress 9.2 (2012) - Export to ePUB 3.0, plus ability to create ePUB files from scratch. Improvements to App Studio, including iOS5 support. QuarkXPress 9.2.1 (2012) (Mac OS X only) - Fix &quot; missing icons &quot; bug caused by Lion 10.7.3 QuarkXPress 9.2.1.1 (2012) - Added support for exporting to the Retina iPad QuarkXpress 9.3 - Export eBooks directly to Amazon Kindle format, plus other minor fixes including EPS and PDF color management. [ See also ] Adobe InDesign Adobe PageMaker Corel Ventura Microsoft Publisher Scribus Quark CopyDesk Quark Publishing System XTension [ References ] [ External links ] Quark Inc. (official site) QuarkXPress 9 (official site) QuarkXPress Server (official site) Quark User Blog QuarkXPress in Russia xpresslife.net (blog) Conversion tools with InDesign: Markzware InDesign to Quark Converter QuarkXPress Tutorials: QuarkEd free e-learning files on quark.com Plug-ins / Add-ons for QuarkXPress (called XTensions) QuarkXPress XTensions Category:Desktop publishing software Category:Graphic design ca:QuarkXPress de:QuarkXPress et:QuarkXPress es:QuarkXPress fa:کوارک اکسپرس fr:QuarkXPress gl:QuarkXPress ko:쿼크익스프레스 it:QuarkXPress ja:QuarkXPress no:QuarkXPress pl:QuarkXPress pt:QuarkXPress ro:QuarkXPress ru:QuarkXPress fi:QuarkXPress sv:Quarkxpress tr:QuarkXPress uk:QuarkXPress