[ February 2012 ] [ William of Orange Adriaen Thomas Key ca.  1570–84 ] [ 1533 4 24 y ] { Dillenburg, } { Nassau, } { Holy Roman Empire (now Germany) } [ 1584 7 10 1533 4 24 y ] { Delft, Netherlands } { Prince of Orange } { 1544 } { 1584 } { René of Châlon } { Philip William, Prince of Orange } { Stadtholder of Holland, Zeeland, Utrecht, Friesland Leader of the } { Dutch Revolt } { Calvinism } { 1559 } { 1584 } { Stadtholder of Holland, Zeeland, and Utrecht } { 1559 } { 1567 (removed from office after flight) } { Philip II of Spain } { Maximilian II of Burgundy } { Maximilien de Hénin-Liétard } { Stadtholder of Holland, Zeeland, and Utrecht (reinstated by } { States General ) } { 1572 } { 1584 (assassination) } { Maximilien de Hénin-Liétard } { Adolf van Nieuwenaar (Utrecht) } { Maurice of Nassau, Prince of Orange (Holland and Zeeland) } { Republican Stadtholder of Friesland } { 1580 } { 1584 (assassination) } William I, Prince of Orange (24 April 1533 – 10 July 1584), also widely known as William the Silent ( [ Willem de Zwijger ] ), or simply William of Orange ( [ Willem van Oranje ] ), was the main leader of the Dutch revolt against the Spanish that set off the Eighty Years&apos; War and resulted in the formal independence of the United Provinces in 1648. He was born in the House of Nassau as Count of Nassau-Dillenburg. He became Prince of Orange in 1544 and is thereby the founder of the branch House of Orange-Nassau. A wealthy nobleman, William originally served the Habsburgs as a member of the court of Margaret of Parma, governor of the Spanish Netherlands. Unhappy with the centralisation of political power away from the local estates and with the Spanish persecution of Dutch Protestants, William joined the Dutch uprising and turned against his former masters. The most influential and politically capable of the rebels, he led the Dutch to several successes in the fight against the Spanish. Declared an outlaw by the Spanish king in 1580, he was assassinated by Balthasar Gérard (also written as &apos;Gerardts&apos;) in Delft four years later. [ Early life ] { Dillenburg in the duchy } { Nassau, the birth place of William the Silent } [ Antonio Moro - Willem I van Nassau.jpg Full body portrait of William the Silent 130 William the Silent in 1555 Anna von Egmond.jpg Close-up portrait of Anna of Egmond 114 Anna of Egmond in c. 1550 ] William was born on 24 April 1533 in the castle of Dillenburg in the Holy Roman Empire, now Nassau, Germany. He was the eldest son of William, Count of Nassau and Juliana of Stolberg-Werningerode, and was raised a Lutheran. He had four younger brothers and seven younger sisters: John, Hermanna, Louis, Maria, Anna, Elisabeth, Katharine, Juliane, Magdalene, Adolf and Henry. When his cousin, René of Châlon, Prince of Orange, died childless in 1544, the eleven-year-old William inherited all Châlon&apos;s property, including the title Prince of Orange, on the condition that he receive a Roman Catholic education. This was the founding of the house of Orange-Nassau. Besides Châlon&apos;s properties, he also inherited vast estates in the Low Countries (present-day Netherlands and Belgium). Because of his young age, the Holy Roman Emperor Charles V served as the regent of the principality until William was fit to rule. William was sent to the Netherlands to receive the required education, first at the family&apos;s estate in Breda, later in Brussels under the supervision of Mary of Habsburg (Mary of Hungary), the sister of Charles V and governor of the Habsburg Netherlands ( Seventeen Provinces ). In Brussels, he was taught foreign languages and received a military and diplomatic education { Wedgwood (1944) p. 29. } under the direction of Champagney (Jérôme Perrenot), brother of Granvelle. On 6 July 1551, he married Anna van Egmond en Buren, the wealthy heir to the lands of her father, and William gained the titles Lord of Egmond and Count of Buren. They had three children. Later that same year, William was appointed captain in the cavalry. Favoured by Charles V, he was rapidly promoted, and became commander of one of the Emperor&apos;s armies at the age of 22. He was made a member of the Raad van State, the highest political advisory council in the Netherlands. { As of 1549, the Low Countries, also known as the &quot; Seventeen Provinces &quot; comprised the present-day Netherlands, Belgium, Luxembourg, and parts of northern France. } It was in November 1555, shortly after Charles had abdicated in favour of his son, Philip II of Spain that the gout-afflicted Emperor leaned on William&apos;s shoulder during his abdication ceremony. { J. Thorold Rogers, } { The Story of Nations: Holland. London, 1889; Romein, J., and Romein-Verschoor, A. Erflaters van onze beschaving. Amsterdam 1938–1940, p. 150. (Dutch, at DBNL.org ). } His wife Anna died on 24 March 1558. Later, William had a brief relationship with Eva Elincx, leading to the birth of their illegitimate son, Justinus van Nassau : { &quot; Justinus of Nassau is the son, probably born in September 1559, of the Prince and Eva Elinx, who, according to some, was the daughter of a mayor of Emmerich. &quot; ( Adriaen Valerius, Nederlandtsche gedenck-clanck. P.J. Meertens, N.B. Tenhaeff and A. Komter-Kuipers (eds.). Wereldbibliotheek, Amsterdam 1942; p. 148, note. (Dutch, on DBNL)). } { &quot;...our son Justin van Nassau &quot; in letter from William of Orange to Diederik Sonoy dated 16 July 1582, facsimile at Inghist.nl } William officially recognised him and took responsibility for his education – Justinus would become an admiral in his later years. In 1559, Philip appointed William as the stadtholder (governor) of the provinces Holland, Zeeland and Utrecht, thereby greatly increasing his political power. { Wedgwood (1944) p. 34. } A stadtholdership over Franche-Comté followed in 1561. [ From politician to rebel ] Although he never directly opposed the Spanish king, William soon became one of the most prominent members of the opposition in the Council of State, together with Philip de Montmorency, Count of Hoorn and Lamoral, Count of Egmont. They were mainly seeking more political power for themselves against the de facto government of Count Berlaymont, Granvelle and Viglius of Aytta, but also for the Dutch nobility and, ostensibly, for the Estates, and complained that too many Spaniards were involved in governing the Netherlands. William was also dissatisfied with the increasing persecution of Protestants in the Netherlands. Brought up as a Lutheran and later a Catholic, William was very religious but was still a proponent of freedom of religion for all people. The inquisition policy in the Netherlands, carried out by Cardinal Granvelle, prime minister to the new governor Margaret of Parma (1522–83) (natural half-sister to Philip II), increased opposition to Spanish rule among the – then mostly Catholic – population of the Netherlands. Lastly, the members of the opposition wished to see an end to the presence of Spanish troops. On 25 August 1561, William of Orange married for the second time. His new wife, Anna of Saxony, was described by contemporaries as &quot; self-absorbed, weak, assertive, and cruel &quot;, { Wedgwood (1944) p. 50. } and it is generally assumed that William married her to gain more influence in Saxony, Hesse and the Palatine. { Wedgwood (1944) p. 49. } The couple had five children. { Anna of Saxony, second wife of William the Silent } Up to 1564, any criticism of governmental measures voiced by William and the other members of the opposition had ostensibly been directed at Granvelle; however, after the latter&apos;s departure early that year, William, who may have found increasing confidence in his alliance with the Protestant princes of Germany following his second marriage, { Herman Kaptein, De Beeldenstorm (2002), 22 } began to openly criticize the King&apos;s anti-Protestant politics. In an iconic speech to the Council of State, William to the shock of his audience motivated his conflict with King Philip II by saying that, even though he had decided for himself to keep to the Catholic faith, he could not approve that monarchs should desire to rule over the souls of their subjects and take away from them their freedom of belief and religion. { &quot; Et quamquam ipse Catholicae Religioni adhaerere constituerit, non posse tamen ei placere, velle Principes animis hominum imperare, libertatemque Fidei &amp; Religionis ipsis adimere. &quot; C.P. Hoynck van Papendrecht, Vita Viglii ab Aytta, in Analecta belgica I, 41–42 (F. Postma, &quot; Prefigurations of the future? The views on the boundaries of Church and State of William of Orange and Viglius van Aytta (1565–1566) &quot;, in A.A. McDonald and A.H. Huussen (eds.), Scholarly environments: centres of learning and institutional contexts, 1560–1960 (2004), 15–32, esp. 15). } Later, in his Apology (1580), William stated that his resolve to oppose the King&apos;s policies had originated in June 1559, when, during a hunting trip to the Bois de Vincennes together with the duke of Alva and King Henry II of France, to whom both had been sent as hostages to ensure the proper fulfilment of the conditions of the Treaty of Cateau-Cambrésis following the Hispano-French war, the latter two had openly discussed a secret understanding between Philip and Henry which aimed at the extermination of the Protestants in both France and the Netherlands; William at that time had kept silent, but had decided for himself that he would not allow the slaughter of so many innocent subjects. In early 1565, a large group of lesser noblemen, including William&apos;s younger brother Louis, formed the Confederacy of Noblemen. On 5 April, they offered a petition to Margaret of Parma, requesting an end to the persecution of Protestants. From August to October 1566, a wave of iconoclasm (known as the Beeldenstorm ) spread through the Low Countries. Calvinists, Anabaptists and Mennonites, angry with their being persecuted by the Roman Catholic Church and opposed to the Catholic images of saints (which in their eyes conflicted with the Second Commandment ), destroyed statues in hundreds of churches and monasteries throughout the Netherlands. Following the Beeldenstorm, unrest in the Netherlands grew, and Margaret agreed to grant the wishes of the Confederacy, provided the noblemen would help to restore order. She also allowed more important noblemen, including William of Orange, to assist the Confederacy. In late 1566, and early 1567, it became clear that she would not be allowed to fulfil her promises, and when several minor rebellions failed, many Calvinists (the major Protestant denomination) and Lutheran s fled the country. Following the announcement that Philip II, unhappy with the situation in the Netherlands, would dispatch his loyal general Fernando Álvarez de Toledo, Duke of Alba (also known as &quot; The Iron Duke &quot; ) to restore order, William laid down his functions and retreated to his native Nassau in April 1567. He had been (financially) involved with several of the rebellions. { Fernando Álvarez de Toledo, 3rd Duke of Alba, portrait by } { Anthonis Mor } After his arrival in August 1567, Alba established the Council of Troubles (known to the people as the Council of Blood) to judge those involved in the rebellion and the iconoclasm. William was one of the 10,000 to be summoned before the Council, but he failed to appear. He was subsequently declared an outlaw, and his properties were confiscated. As one of the most prominent and popular politicians of the Netherlands, William of Orange emerged as the leader of an armed resistance. He financed the Watergeuzen, refugee Protestants who formed bands of corsairs and raided the coastal cities of the Netherlands (often killing Spanish and Dutch alike). He also raised an army, consisting mostly of German mercenaries to fight Alba on land. William allied with the French Huguenots, following the end of the second Religious War in France when they had troops to spare. { Wedgwood (1944) p. 104. } Led by his brother Louis, the army invaded the northern Netherlands in 1568. However the plan failed almost from the start. The Huguenots were defeated by French Royal Troops before they could invade, and a small force under Jean de Villers was captured within two days. Villers gave all the plans of the campaign to the Spanish following his capture. { Wedgwood (1944) p. 105. } On 23 May, the army under the command of Louis won the Battle of Heiligerlee in the northern province of Groningen against a Spanish army led by the stadtholder of the northern provinces, Jean de Ligne, Duke of Aremberg. Aremberg was killed in the battle, as was William&apos;s brother Adolf. Alba countered by killing a number of convicted noblemen (including the Counts of Egmont and Hoorn on 6 June), and then by leading an expedition to Groningen. There, he annihilated Louis’ forces on German territory in the Battle of Jemmingen on 21 July, although Louis managed to escape. { Wedgwood (1944) p. 108. } These two battles are now considered to be the start of the Eighty Years&apos; War. [ War ] Coat of Arms of William { coat of arms of William of Orange, was used by the Dutch rebels, and was the basis of the current } { flag of the Netherlands. } { Charlotte de Bourbon-Montpensier } William responded by leading a large army into Brabant, but Alba carefully avoided a decisive confrontation, expecting the army to fall apart quickly. As William advanced, riots broke out in his army, and with winter approaching and money running out, William decided to turn back. { Wedgwood (1944) p. 109. } William made several more plans to invade in the next few years, but little came of them, since he lacked support and money. He remained popular with the public, in part through an extensive propaganda campaign conducted through pamphlets. One of his most important claims, with which he attempted to justify his actions, was that he was not fighting the rightful owner of the land, the Spanish king, but only the inadequate rule of the foreign governors in the Netherlands, and the presence of foreign soldiers. On 1 April 1572 a band of Watergeuzen captured the city of Brielle, which had been left unattended by the Spanish garrison. Contrary to their normal &quot; hit and run &quot; tactics, they occupied the town and claimed it for the prince by raising the Prince of Orange&apos;s flag above the city. { Wedgwood (1944) p. 120. } This event was followed by other cities opening their gates for the Watergeuzen, and soon most cities in Holland and Zeeland were in the hands of the rebels, notable exceptions being Amsterdam and Middelburg. The rebel cities then called a meeting of the Staten Generaal (which they were technically unqualified to do), and reinstated William as the stadtholder of Holland and Zeeland. Concurrently, rebel armies captured cities throughout the entire country, from Deventer to Mons. William himself then advanced with his own army and marched into several cities in the south, including Roermond and Leuven. William had counted on intervention from the French Protestants ( Huguenots ) as well, but this plan was thwarted after the St. Bartholomew&apos;s Day Massacre on 24 August, which signalled the start of a wave of violence against the Huguenots. After a successful Spanish attack on his army, William had to flee and he retreated to Enkhuizen, in Holland. The Spanish then organised countermeasures, and sacked several rebel cities, sometimes massacring their inhabitants, such as in Mechelen or Zutphen. They had more trouble with the cities in Holland, where they took Haarlem after seven months and a loss of 8,000 soldiers, and they had to break off their siege of Alkmaar. In 1573, William joined the Calvinist Church. { G. Parker, The Dutch Revolt (revised edition, 1985), p. 148 } In 1574, William&apos;s armies won several minor battles, including several naval encounters. The Spanish, led by Don Luis de Zúñiga y Requesens since Philip replaced Alba in 1573, also had their successes. Their decisive victory in the Battle of Mookerheyde in the south east, on the Meuse embankment, on 14 April cost the lives of two of William&apos;s brothers, Louis and Henry. Requesens&apos;s armies also besieged the city of Leiden. They broke off their siege when nearby dykes were breached by the Dutch. William was very content with the victory, and established the University of Leiden, the first university in the Northern Provinces. William had his previous marriage legally disbanded in 1571, on claims that his wife Anna was insane. He then was married for the third time on 24 April 1575 to Charlotte de Bourbon-Monpensier, a former French nun, who was also popular with the public. Together, they had six daughters. The marriage, which seems to have been a love match on both sides, was happy. After failed peace negotiations in Breda in 1575, the war lingered on. The situation improved for the rebels when Don Requesens died unexpectedly in March 1576, and a large group of Spanish soldiers, not having received their salary in months, mutinied in November of that year and unleashed the Spanish Fury on the city of Antwerp, a tremendous propaganda coup for the Dutch Revolt. While the new governor, Don John of Austria, was under way, William of Orange managed to have most of the provinces and cities sign the Pacification of Ghent, in which they declared themselves ready to fight for the expulsion of Spanish troops together. However, he failed to achieve unity in matters of religion. Catholic cities and provinces would not allow freedom for Calvinists, and vice versa. When Don John signed the Perpetual Edict in February 1577, promising to comply with the conditions of the Pacification of Ghent, it seemed that the war had been decided in favour of the rebels. However, after Don John took the city of Namur in 1577, the uprising spread throughout the entire Netherlands. Don John attempted to negotiate peace, but the prince intentionally let the negotiations fail. On 24 September 1577, he made his triumphal entry in the capital Brussels. At the same time, Calvinist rebels grew more radical, and attempted to forbid Catholicism in areas under their control. William was opposed to this both for personal and political reasons. He desired freedom of religion, and he also needed the support of the less radical Protestants and Catholics to reach his political goals. On 6 January 1579, several southern provinces, unhappy with William&apos;s radical following, signed the Treaty of Arras, in which they agreed to accept their Catholic governor, Alessandro Farnese, Duke of Parma (who had succeeded Don John). Five northern provinces, later followed by most cities in Brabant and Flanders, then signed the Union of Utrecht on 23 January, confirming their unity. William was initially opposed to the Union, as he still hoped to unite all provinces. Nevertheless, he formally gave his support on 3 May. The Union of Utrecht would later become a de facto constitution, and would remain the only formal connection between the Dutch provinces until 1795. [ Declaration of Independence ] { Duke of Anjou, who had been recruited by William as the new sovereign of the Netherlands, was hugely unpopular with the public. } { Louise de Coligny } { Frederick Henry, Prince of Orange } In spite of the renewed union, the Duke of Parma was successful in reconquering most of the southern part of the Netherlands. Because he had agreed to remove the Spanish troops from the provinces under the Treaty of Arras, and because Philip II needed them elsewhere subsequently, the Duke of Parma was unable to advance any further until the end of 1581. In the mean time, William and his supporters were looking for foreign support. The prince had already sought French assistance on several occasions, and this time he managed to gain the support of François, Duke of Anjou, brother of king Henry III of France. On 29 September 1580, the Staten Generaal (with the exception of Zeeland and Holland) signed the Treaty of Plessis-les-Tours with the Duke of Anjou. The Duke would gain the title &quot; Protector of the Liberty of the Netherlands &quot; and become the new sovereign. This, however, required that the Staten Generaal and William renounce their formal support of the King of Spain, which they had maintained officially up to that moment. On 22 July 1581, the Staten Generaal declared their decision to no longer recognise Philip II as their king, in the Act of Abjuration. This formal declaration of independence enabled the Duke of Anjou to come to the aid of the resisters. He did not arrive until 10 February 1582, when he was officially welcomed by William in Flushing. On 18 March, the Spaniard Juan de Jáuregui attempted to assassinate William in Antwerp. Although William suffered severe injuries, he survived thanks to the care of his wife Charlotte and his sister Mary. While William slowly recovered, the intensive care administered by Charlotte took its toll, and she died on 5 May. The Duke of Anjou was not very popular with the population. The provinces of Zeeland and Holland refused to recognise him as their sovereign, and William was widely criticised for what were called his &quot; French politics &quot;. When the Anjou&apos;s French troops arrived in late 1582, William&apos;s plan seemed to pay off, as even the Duke of Parma feared that the Dutch would now gain the upper hand. However, the Duke of Anjou himself was displeased with his limited powers, and decided to take the city of Antwerp by force on 18 January 1583. The citizens, who had been warned in time, defended their city in what is known as the &quot; French Fury &quot;. Anjou&apos;s entire army was killed, and he received reprimands from both Catherine de Medici and Elizabeth I of England (whom he had courted). The position of Anjou after this attack became untenable, and he eventually left the country in June. His departure also discredited William, who nevertheless maintained his support for Anjou. He stood virtually alone on this issue, and became politically isolated. Holland and Zeeland nevertheless maintained him as their stadtholder, and attempted to declare him count of Holland and Zeeland, thus making him the official sovereign. In the middle of all this, William had married for the fourth and final time on 12 April 1583 to Louise de Coligny, a French Huguenot and daughter of Gaspard de Coligny. She was to be the mother of Frederick Henry (1584–1647), William&apos;s fourth legitimate son. [ Assassination ] William the Silent was killed at his home by Balthasar Gérard on 10 July 1584 { Prinsenhof in Delft } The Catholic Frenchman Balthasar Gérard (born 1557) was a supporter of Philip II, and in his opinion, William of Orange had betrayed the Spanish king and the Catholic religion. After Philip II declared William an outlaw and promised a reward of 25,000 crowns for his assassination, and of which Gérard learned in 1581, he decided to travel to the Netherlands to kill William. He served in the army of the governor of Luxembourg, Peter Ernst I von Mansfeld-Vorderort for two years, hoping to get close to William when the armies met. This never happened, and Gérard left the army in 1584. He went to the Duke of Parma to present his plans, but the Duke was unimpressed. In May 1584, he presented himself to William as a French nobleman, and gave him the seal of the Count of Mansfelt. This seal would allow forgeries of the messages of Mansfelt to be made. William sent Gérard back to France to pass the seal on to his French allies. Gérard returned in July, having bought pistols on his return voyage. On 10 July, he made an appointment with William of Orange in his home in Delft, nowadays known as the Prinsenhof. That day, William was having dinner with his guest Rombertus van Uylenburgh. After William left the dining room and climbed down the stairs, Van Uylenburgh heard Gérard shoot William in the chest at close range. Gérard fled to collect his reward. According to official records, { Minutes of the States-General of 10 July 1584, quoted in JW Berkelbach van der Sprenkel, De Vader des Vaderlands, Haarlem 1941, p. 29: &quot; Ten desen daghe es geschiet de clachelycke moort van Zijne Excellentie, die tusschen den een ende twee uren na den noen es ghescoten met een pistolet gheladen met dry ballen, deur een genaempt Baltazar Geraert... Ende heeft Zijne Excellentie in het vallen gheroepen: Mijn God, ontfermpt U mijnder ende Uwer ermen ghemeynte (Mon Dieu ayez pitié de mon âme, mon Dieu, ayez pitié de ce pauvre peuple) &quot;. } William&apos;s last words are said to have been: { Although commonly accepted, his last words might have been modified for propaganda purposes. See Charles Vergeer, &quot; De laatste woorden van prins Willem &quot;, Maatstaf 28 (1981), no. 12, pp. 67–100. The debate has some history, with critics pointing to sources saying that William died immediately after having been shot and proponents stating that there would have been little opportunity to fabricate the words between the time of the assassination and the announcement of the murder to the States-General. Of the final words themselves, several slightly different versions are in circulation, the main differences being of style. } [ Mon Dieu, ayez pitié de mon âme; mon Dieu, ayez pitié de ce pauvre peuple. ] [ My God, have pity on my soul; my God, have pity on this poor people. ] Gérard was caught before he could flee Delft, and imprisoned. He was tortured before his trial on 13 July, where he was sentenced to be brutally – even by the standards of that time – killed. The magistrates decreed that the right hand of Gérard should be burned off with a red-hot iron, that his flesh should be torn from his bones with pincers in six different places, that he should be quartered and disembowelled alive, that his heart should be torn from his bosom and flung in his face, and that, finally, his head should be cut off. [ Motley John L. The Rise of the Dutch Republic, Vol. 3 http://www.gutenberg.org/etext/4836 John Lothrop Motley 1856 ] Traditionally, members of the Nassau family were buried in Breda, but as that city was in Spanish hands when William died, he was buried in the New Church in Delft. His monument on his tomb was originally very modest, but it was replaced in 1623 by a new one, made by Hendrik de Keyser and his son Pieter. Since then, most of the members of the House of Orange-Nassau, including all Dutch monarchs have been buried in the same church. His great-grandson William the third, King of England and Scotland and Stadtholder in the Netherlands, was buried in Westminster Abbey According to a British historian of science Lisa Jardine, he is reputed to be the first world head of state to be assassinated by handgun, but William was not officially head of state, and the Scottish Regent Moray had been shot 13 years earlier. [ Legacy ] { The Hague. His finger originally pointed towards the } { Binnenhof, but the statue has since been moved. A } { similar statue stands in Voorhees Mall on the campus of } { Rutgers University. } Philip William, William&apos;s eldest son by his first marriage, to Anna of Egmond, succeeded him as the Prince of Orange at the suggestion of Johan van Oldenbarneveldt. Phillip William died in Brussels on 20 February 1618 and was succeeded by his half-brother Maurice, the eldest son by William&apos;s second marriage, to Anna of Saxony, who became Prince of Orange. A strong military leader, he won several victories over the Spanish. Van Oldenbarneveldt managed to sign a very favourable twelve-year armistice in 1609, although Maurice was unhappy with this. Maurice was a heavy drinker and died on 23 April 1625 from liver disease. Maurice had several sons by Margaretha van Mechelen, but he never married her. So, Frederick Henry, Maurice&apos;s half-brother (and William&apos;s youngest son from his fourth marriage, to Louise de Coligny) inherited the title of Prince of Orange. Frederick Henry continued the battle against the Spanish. Frederick Henry died on 14 March 1647 and is buried with his father William &quot; The Silent &quot; in Nieuwe Kerk, Delft. [ http://www.nieuwekerk-delft.nl/ Nieuwekerk-Delft NL ] {. } The Netherlands became formally independent after the Peace of Westphalia in 1648. The son of Frederick Henry, William II of Orange succeeded his father as stadtholder, as did his son, William III of Orange. The latter also became king of England, Scotland and Ireland from 1689. Although he was married to Mary II, Queen of Scotland and England for 17 years, he died childless in 1702. He appointed his cousin Johan Willem Friso (William&apos;s great-great-great-grandson) as his successor. Because Albertine Agnes, a daughter of Frederick Henry, married William Frederik of Nassau-Dietz, the present royal house of the Netherlands is descended from William the Silent through the female line. See House of Orange for a more extensive overview. As the chief financer and political and military leader of the early years of the Dutch revolt, William is considered a national hero in the Netherlands, even though he was born in Germany, and usually spoke French. Many of the Dutch national symbols can be traced back to William of Orange: [ http://www.libraries.rutgers.edu/rul/libs/scua/university_archives/historic_ru_paths.shtml#Willie Willie Libraries: Special Collections and University Archives Rutgers University 23 April 2010 ] [ http://www.flickr.com/photos/sheenachi/3590719700/ Father of His Fatherland, Founder of the United States of the Netherlands Flickr Yahoo! 23 April 2010 ] [ http://www.xs4all.nl/~carlkop/dezwijger.html Planetoïde (12151) Oranje-Nassau Xs4all NL 23 April 2010 ] The flag of the Netherlands (red, white and blue) is derived from the flag of the prince, which was orange, white and blue. The coat of arms of the Netherlands is based on that of William of Orange. Its motto Je maintiendrai (French, &quot; I will maintain &quot; ) was also used by William of Orange, who based it on the motto of his cousin René of Châlon, who used Je maintiendrai Châlon. The national anthem of the Netherlands, the Wilhelmus, was originally a propaganda song for William. It was probably written by Philips of Marnix, Lord of Saint-Aldegonde, a supporter of William of Orange. The national colour of the Netherlands is orange, and it is used, among other things, in the clothing of Dutch athletes. The orange sash of the Prussian Order of the Black Eagle was in honour of the Dutch Dynasty of William the Silent, since the order&apos;s founder, Frederick I of Prussia &apos;s mother, Louise Henrietta of Nassau, was the granddaughter of William the Silent. A statue of William the Silent stands on the main campus of Rutgers University in New Brunswick, New Jersey, a legacy of the university&apos;s founding by ministers of the Dutch Reformed Church in 1766. The statue is commonly known to students and alumni as &quot; Willie the Silent &quot; and contains an inscription referring to William as &quot; Father of his Fatherland. &quot; In January 2008, the asteroid 12151 Oranje-Nassau was named after him. In the 19th century the Netherlands became a constitutional monarchy, currently with Queen Beatrix of Orange as head of state: she is descended from William of Orange, although not in direct line. [ Nickname ] There are several explanations for the origin of his nickname, &quot; William the Silent &quot; ( [ Willem de Zwijger ] ). The most common one relates to his prudence in regard to a conversation with the king of France. One day, during a stag-hunt in the Bois de Vincennes, Henry, finding himself alone with the Prince, began to speak of the great number of Protestant sectaries who, during the late war, had increased so much in his kingdom to his great sorrow. His conscience, said the King, would not be easy nor his realm secure until he could see it purged of the &quot; accursed vermin, &quot; who would one day overthrow his government, under the cover of religion, if they were allowed to get the upper hand. This was the more to be feared since some of the chief men in the kingdom, and even some princes of the blood, were on their side. But he hoped by the grace of God and the good understanding that he had with his new son, the King of Spain, that he would soon get the better of them. The King talked on thus to Orange in the full conviction that he was aware of the secret agreement recently made with the Duke of Alva for the extirpation of heresy. But the Prince, subtle and adroit as he was, answered the good King in such a way as to leave him still under the impression that he, the Prince, knew all about the scheme proposed by Alva; and on this understanding the King revealed all the details of the plan which had been arranged between the King of Spain and himself for the rooting out and rigorous punishment of the heretics, from the lowest to the highest rank, and in this service the Spanish troops were to be mainly employed. { William the Silent by Frederic Harrison pp. 22–23 } Exactly when and by whom the nickname &quot; the Silent &quot; (Modern Dutch: &quot; de Zwijger &quot;, meaning more &quot; the Taciturn &quot; ) was used for the first time is not known with certainty. It is traditionally ascribed to Cardinal de Granvelle, who is said to have referred to William as &quot; the silent one &quot; sometime during the troubles of 1567. Both the nickname and the accompanying anecdote are first found in a historical source from the early 17th century. { &quot; den swijger &quot;, &quot; den Schweiger &quot; : Emanuel van Meteren, 1608 and 1614; cf. &quot; Taciturnus &quot; : Famiano Strada, 1635. The Dutch historian Fruin (1864) has argued that this is in fact an erroneous rendering of the phrase &quot; astutus Gulielmus &quot;, &quot; cunning William &quot;, found in a Latin source of 1574 and attributed there to the Flemish inquisitor Pieter Titelmans. See Leiden University, De Tachtigjarige Oorlog. Willem de Zwijger. } In the Netherlands, William is known as the Vader des Vaderlands, &quot; Father of the Fatherland &quot;, and the Dutch national anthem, the Wilhelmus, { The song is named after the first word of the first line, Wilhelmus, a Latinised form of the prince&apos;s first name. } was written in his honour. [ Issue ] [ Count Maurice August Phillip of Nassau ] Name Birth Death Notes By   Anna of Egmond (married  6 July  1551; b. est  1534, d.  24 March  1558) Countess Maria of Nassau.  22 November  1553 ca.  23 July  1555 Died in infancy. Philip William, Prince of Orange and Count of Nassau  19 December  1554  20 February  1618 married   Eleonora of Bourbon-Condé. Countess Maria of Nassau  7 February  1556  10 October  1616 married Count   Philip of Hohenlohe-Neuenstein By   Anna of Saxony (married  25 August  1561 annulled 22 March 1571; b.  23 December  1544, d.  18 December  1577) Countess Anna of Nassau  31 October  1562  23 November  1562 Died in infancy Countess Anna of Nassau  5 November  1563  13 June  1588 married   Count Wilhelm Ludwig von Nassau-Dillenburg  18 December  1564  8 December  1566 Count,  Died in infancy. Maurice of Nassau, Prince of Orange and Count of Nassau  14 November  1567  23 April  1625 never married Countess Emilia of Nassau  10 April  1569  16 March  1629 married   Manuel de Portugal (son of pretender to the   Portuguese throne   António, Prior of Crato ), 10 children By   Charlotte of Bourbon (married  24 June  1575; b. about  1546, d.  5 May  1582) Countess Louise Juliana of Nassau  31 March  1576  15 March  1644 married   Frederick IV, Elector Palatine, 8 children Countess Elisabeth of Nassau  1577  1642 married to   Henri de La Tour d&apos;Auvergne, and had issue, including   Frédéric Maurice, duc de Bouillon and   Henri de la Tour d&apos;Auvergne, Vicomte de Turenne Countess Catharina Belgica of Nassau  1578  1648 Countess,  married to Count   Philip Louis II of Hanau-Münzenberg Countess Charlotte Flandrina of Nassau  1579  1640 After her mother&apos;s death in 1582 her French grandfather asked for Charlotte Flandrina to stay with him. She became a Roman Catholic and entered a convent in 1593. Countess Charlotte Brabantina of Nassau  1580  1631 married Claude, Duc de Thouars, and had issue, including   Charlotte Stanley, Countess of Derby. Countess Emilia Antwerpiana of Nassau  1581  1657 married   Frederick Casimir, Count Palatine of Zweibrücken-Landsberg By   Louise de Coligny (married  24 April  1583; b.  23 September  1555, d.  13 November  1620) Frederick Henry, Prince of Orange and Count of Nassau b.  29 January  1584 d.  14 March  1647 married to Countess   Amalia of Solms-Braunfels, father of   William II and grandfather of   William III, King of England, Scotland, Ireland and Stadtholder of the Netherlands Between his first and second marriage, William had an extramarital affair with one   Eva Elincx. They had a son,   Justinus van Nassau (1559–1631), whom William acknowledged. [ Coat of Arms ] William used two sets of arms in his lifetime. The first one shown below was his ancestral arms of Nassau. The second arms he used most of his life from the time he became Prince of Orange on the death of his cousin René of Châlon. He placed the arms of Châlon-Arlay as princes of Orange as an inescutcheon on his father&apos;s arms. In 1582 William purchased the marquisate of Veere and Vlissingen in Zeeland. It had been the property of Philip II since 1567, but had fallen into arrears to the province. In 1580 the Court of Holland ordered it sold. William bought it as it gave him two more votes in the States of Zeeland. He owned the government of the two towns, and so could appoint their magistrates. He already had one as First Noble for Philip William, who had inherited Maartensdijk. This made William the predominant member of the States of Zeeland. It was a smaller version of the countship of Zeeland (and Holland) promised to William, and was a potent political base for his descendants. William then added the shield of Veere and Buren to his arms as shown in the third coat of arms below. It shows how arms were used to represent political power in general, and the growing political power of William. [ The princes of Orange: the stadholders in the Dutch Republic Herbert H. Rowen Cambridge University Press 1988 29 0-8063-4811-9 ] [ Armorial general Johannes Baptist Rietstap Genealogical Publishing Co. 2003 vol.2 297 0-8063-4811-9 ] Coat of arms of the House of Nassau (since the 13th century). Coat of arms of William as Prince of Orange until 1582. The coat of arms used by William from 1582 on. [ Ancestry ] [ 100% ] [ 1. William the Silent 2. William I, Count of Nassau-Dillenburg 3. Juliana of Stolberg-Wernigerode 4. John V of Nassau-Dillenburg 5. Elisabeth of Hesse 6. Bodo VIII, Count of Stolberg-Wernigerode 7. Anna of Eppstein-Königstein 8. John IV of Nassau-Dillenburg 9. Maria of Loon-Heinsberg 10. Henry III, Landgrave of Hesse 11. Anna of Katzenelnbogen 12. Henry IX, Count of Stolberg 13. Mathilde of Mansfeld 14. Philip I of Eppstein 15. Louise de La Marck 16. Engelbert I, Count of Nassau-Dillenburg 17. Johanna of Polanen 18. John II of Heinsberg 19. Anna of Solms-Braunfels 20. Louis I, Landgrave of Hesse 21. Anna of Saxony 22. Philip I, Count of Katzenelnbogen 23. Anna of Württemberg 24. Botho I, Count of Stolberg 25. Anna of Schwarzburg-Blankenburg 26. Volrad II, Count of Mansfeld 27. Margareta of Schlesien-Sagan 28. Eberhard III of Eppstein 29. Anna of Nassau-Wiesbaden-Idstein 30. Louis de La Marck, Count of Rochefort 31. Nicole d&apos;Aspremont 24. Botho I, Count of Stolberg 25. Anna of Schwarzburg-Blankenburg 26. Volrad II, Count of Mansfeld 27. Margareta of Schlesien-Sagan 28. Eberhard III of Eppstein 29. Anna of Nassau-Wiesbaden-Idstein 30. Louis de La Marck, Count of Rochefort 31. Nicole d&apos;Aspremont ] &lt; /center &gt; [ See also ] European wars of religion Wheellock pistol [ Notes ] [ 2 ] [ References ] Herbert H. Rowen, The princes of Orange: the stadholders in the Dutch Republic. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press, 1988. John Lothrop Motley, &quot; The Rise of the Dutch Republic &quot;. New York: Harper &amp; Brothers, 1855. John Lothrop Motley, &quot; History of the United Netherlands from the Death of William the Silent to the Synod of Dort &quot;. London: John Murray, 1860. John Lothrop Motley, &quot; The Life and Death of John of Barenvelt &quot;. New York &amp; London: Harper and Brothers Publishing, 1900. Petrus Johannes Blok, &quot; History of the people of the Netherlands &quot;. New York: G. P. Putnam&apos;s sons, 1898. Jardine, Lisa. The Awful End of William the Silent: The First Assassination of a Head of State with A Handgun. London: HarperCollins: 2005: ISBN 0-00-719257-6 van der Lem, Anton. 1995. De Opstand in de Nederlanden 1555–1609. Utrecht: Kosmos. ISBN 90-215-2574-7. Various authors. 1977. Winkler Prins – Geschiedenis der Nederlanden. Amsterdam: Elsevier. ISBN 90-10-01745-1. Wedgwood, Cicely. 1944. William the Silent: William of Nassau, Prince of Orange, 1533–1584. [ External links ] The Revolt of the Netherlands Het Huis van Oranje-Nassau en de Nederlandse geschiedenis Willem van Oranje. Dutch history website The Complete Correspondence of William I of Orange. Digital archive by the Huygens Institute for Dutch History [ House of Orange-Nassau 24 April 1533 10 July 1584 House of Nassau ] |- [ René ] [ Prince of Orange Baron of Breda 1544–1584 ] [ Philip William ] |- [ 2 Maximilian II of Burgundy, Marquess of Veere ] [ Stadtholder of Holland and Zeeland 1559–1567 ] [ 2 Maximilian of Hennin (during the Eighty Years War ) ] [ Stadtholder of Utrecht 1559–1567 ] [ 2 Philip of Noircarmes (during the Eighty Years War ) ] [ Stadtholder of Holland and Zeeland 1572–1584 ] [ Maurice of Nassau, Prince of Orange ] [ Stadtholder of Utrecht 1572–1584 ] [ Adolf van Nieuwenaar ] [ Creation of the Dutch Republic ] [ Republican Stadtholder of Friesland 1580–1584 ] [ William Louis of Nassau ] [ William 01 of Orange-Nassau William the Silent (nickname); Willem de Zwijger (Dutch); Willem van Oranje (Dutch) Leader of the Dutch revolt in the Eighty Years&apos; War and Prince of Orange (1544–1584) 24 April 1533 Dillenburg, Nassau, Holy Roman Empire (now Germany) 10 July 1584 Delft, Netherlands ] Category:1533 births Category:1584 deaths Category:People from Dillenburg Category:German nobility Category:Assassinated Dutch politicians Category:Burials in the Royal Crypt at Nieuwe Kerk, Delft Category:Deaths by firearm in the Netherlands Category:Dutch rebels Category:Dutch stadtholders Category:German people of the Eighty Years&apos; War Category:Knights of the Golden Fleece Category:Leiden University Category:Lords of Breda Category:Modern child rulers Category:Murdered royalty Category:People murdered in the Netherlands Category:People of the French Wars of Religion Category:Princes of Orange [ sv ] ar:وليام الكتوم az:Oranlı Vilhelm zh-min-nan:Willem van Oranje be:Вільгельм I Аранскі be-x-old:Вільгельм Аранскі bg:Вилхелм Орански ca:Guillem I d&apos;Orange-Nassau cs:Vilém I. Oranžský cy:Wiliam I, Tywysog Orange da:Vilhelm den Tavse de:Wilhelm I. (Oranien) et:Oranje Willem es:Guillermo de Orange eo:Vilhelmo la 1-a de Oranje-Nassau eu:Gilen I.a Orange-Nassaukoa fa:ویلیام خاموش fr:Guillaume Ier d&apos;Orange-Nassau fy:Willem fan Oranje ko:오라녜 공 빌럼 1세 hy:Վիլհելմ I Օրանացի is:Vilhjálmur þögli it:Guglielmo I d&apos;Orange he:וילם השתקן la:Gulielmus Auriacus hu:I. Vilmos orániai herceg arz:ويليام الصامت ms:William I dari Orange my:ဝီလျံ၊ သ ဆိုင်းလင့် nl:Willem van Oranje nds-nl:Willem van Oranje ja:ウィレム1世 (オラニエ公) no:Vilhelm I av Oranien pl:Wilhelm I Orański pt:Guilherme I, príncipe de Orange ro:Wilhelm de Orania ru:Вильгельм I Оранский simple:William the Silent sl:Viljem I. Oranski sr:Вилем I Орански Ћутљиви fi:Vilhelm I Oranialainen sv:Vilhelm I av Oranien uk:Вільгельм I Оранський vi:Willem de Zwijger vls:Willem van Oranje war:William nga Mamingaw zh:威廉一世 (奥兰治)