[ Karantanija March 2012 ] [ Slovenia ] Carantania, also known as Carentania ( [ Karantanija ], [ Karantanien ], in Old Slavic [ sla *Korǫtanъ ] ) was a Slavic principality that emerged in the second half of the 7th century, in the territory of present-day southern Austria and north-eastern Slovenia. It was the predecessor of the March of Carinthia, created within the Carolingian Empire in 889. [ Origin of the name ] The name Carantania is of pre- Slavic origin. It has two possible etymologies. It may be formed from a toponymic base carant- which ultimately derives from pre- Indo-European root *karra meaning &apos;rock&apos;, or it may be of Celtic origin and derived from *karantos meaning &apos;friend, ally&apos;. Its Slavic name [ sla *korǫtanъ ] was adopted from the Latin *carantanum. The toponym Carinthia (Slovene: [ sl Koroška ] &lt; Proto-Slavic [ *korǫt’ьsko ] ) is also claimed to be etymologically related, deriving from pre-Slavic *carantia. { France Bezlaj, Etimološki slovar slovenskega jezika (Slovenian } { Etymological Dictionary ). Vol. 2: K-O / edited by Bogomil Gerlanc. - 1982. p. 68. Ljubljana: Mladinska knjiga, 1976-2005. } [ Territory ] Carantania&apos;s capital was most likely Karnburg (Slovene: Krnski grad) in the Zollfeld Field ( [ sl Gosposvetsko polje ] ), north of modern-day town of Klagenfurt ( [ sl Celovec ] ). The principality was centered in the area of modern Carinthia, and included territories of modern Styria, most of today&apos;s East Tyrol and of the Puster Valley, the Lungau and Ennspongau regions of Salzburg, and parts of southern Upper Austria and Lower Austria. It most probably also included the territory of the modern Slovenian province of Carinthia. The few existing historical sources distinguish between two separate Slavic principalities in the Eastern Alpine area: Carantania and Carniola. The latter, which appears in historical records dating from the late 8th century, was situated in the central part of modern Slovenia. It was (at least by name) the predecessor of the later Duchy of Carniola. The borders of the later Carantania state, which was under the feudal overlordship of the Carolingian s, and its successor, the March of Carinthia, 826-976), as well as of the later Duchy of Carinthia (from 976), extended beyond historical Carantania. [ History ] [ Slavic settlement of the Eastern Alps ] { Frankish Empire (788 - 843 A.D.) } In 568, the Langobards receded into Northern Italy. Subsequently, in the last decades of the 6th century, Slavs settled in the depopulated territory with the help of their Avar overlords. In 588 they reached the area of the Upper Sava River and in 591 they arrived in the Upper Drava region, where they soon fought with the Bavarians under Duke Tassilo I. In 592 the Bavarians won, but three years later, in 595 the Slavic-Avar army gained victory and thus consolidated the boundary between the Frankish and the Avar territories. { Peter Štih, Ozemlje Slovenije v zgodnjem srednjem veku: osnovne poteze zgodovinskega razvoja od začetka 6. stoletja do konca 9. stoletja [The territory of Slovenia during early Middle Ages: a basic outline of historical development from early 6th century to late 9th century], Ljubljana, 2001. } By that time, today&apos;s East Tyrol and Carinthia came to be referred to in historical sources as Provincia Sclaborum (the Country of Slavs). { Oto Luthar, ed., &quot; The Land Between: A History of Slovenia &quot;. Frankurt am Main [etc.]: } { Peter Lang, cop. 2008. ISBN 978-3-631-57011-1. } { Paulus Diaconus, &quot; Historia Langobardorum &quot;. } Slavic settlement in the Eastern Alps region is proven by the collapse of local dioceses in the late 6th century, a change in population and material culture, and most importantly, in the establishment of a Slavic language group in the area. The territory settled by Slavs, however, was also inhabited by the remains of the indigenous Romanized population, which preserved Christianity. Slavs in both the Eastern Alps and the Pannonian region were originally subject to Avar rulers (kagans). After Avar rule weakened around 610, a relatively independent March of the Slavs (marca Vinedorum), governed by a duke, emerged in southern Carinthia in the early 7th century. Historical sources mention Valuk as the duke of Slavs (Wallux dux Winedorum). In 623 Slavs of the Eastern Alps probably joined Samo &apos;s Tribal Union, a Slavic tribal alliance governed by the Frankish merchant Samo. The year 626 brought an end to Avar dominance over Slavs, as Avars were defeated at Constantinople. { Peter Štih. &quot; Slovenska zgodovina: Od prazgodovinskih kultur do konca srednjega veka &quot;. [Slovenian history: From prehistoric cultures to late Middle Ages] } In 658 Samo died and his Tribal Union disintegrated. A smaller part of the original March of the Slavs, centred north of modern Klagenfurt, preserved independence and came to be known as Carantania. The name Carantania itself begins to appear in historical sources soon after 660. The first clear indication of a specific ethnic identity and political organisation may be recognised in the geographical term Carantanum which Paul the Deacon used in reference to the year 664, and in connection to which he also mentioned a specific Slavic people (gens Sclavorum) living there. In 745, Carantania lost its independence and became part of the semifeudal Frankish Empire (which was ruled by the emperor Charlemagne from 771 to 814), due to the pressing danger posed by Avar tribes from the east. Avars regained eastern parts of Carantania between 745 and 795. In 828, Carantania became a margraviate of the Frankish empire. The local princes were deposed for following the anti-Frankish rebellion of Ljudevit Posavski and replaced by a Germanic (primarily Bavaria n ) ascendancy. In 843 it passed into the hands of Louis the German (804-876). In 887 Arnulf of Carinthia (850-899), a bastard grandson of Louis the German, assumed his title of King of the East Franks and became the first Duke of Carinthia. [ The Ducal Inauguration ] { Maria Saal (Gospa Sveta) } The principality of Carantania is particularly notable for the ancient ritual of installing Carantanian dukes (or princes, both an approximate translation of Fürst ), a practice that continued after Carantania was incorporated into the later Duchy of Carinthia. It was last performed in 1414, when the Habsburg Ernest the Iron was enthroned as Duke of Carinthia. The ritual took place on the Prince&apos;s Stone (Slovenian Knežji kamen, German Fürstenstein), an ancient Roman column capital near Krnski grad (now Karnburg ) and was performed in the Slovene language by a free peasant who, selected by his peers, in the name of the people of the land questioned the new Prince about his integrity and reminded him of his duties. Later, when the Duchy of Carinthia had fallen to the Habsburgs, the idea that it was actually the people from whom the Duke of Carinthia received his legitimation was the basis of the Habsburgs&apos; claim to the unique title of Archduke. The coronation of Carinthian Dukes consisted of three parts: first, a ritual in the Slovene language was performed at the Prince&apos;s Stone; then a mass was held at the cathedral of Maria Saal ( [ sl Gospa Sveta ] ); and subsequently, a ceremony took place at the Duke&apos;s Chair ( [ sl Vojvodski stol ], German: [ de Herzogsstuhl ] ), where the new Duke swore an oath in German and where he also received the homage of the estates. The Duke&apos;s Chair is located at Zollfeld valley, north of Klagenfurt in modern Carinthia, Austria. The ceremony was first described by the chronicler John of Viktring on the occasion of the coronation of Meinhard II of Tyrol in 1286. It is also mentioned in Jean Bodin &apos;s book Six livres de la République in 1576. [ Mentionings in late medieval literature ] Chronicle of Fredegar mentions Carantania as Sclauvinia, Dante Alighieri (1265–1321) mentions Carantania as Chiarentana. The same name was also used by Florentines, such as the poet Fazio degli Uberti (circa 1309–1367), the famous chronicler Giovanni Villani (c. 1275–1348), and Giovanni Boccaccio (1313–1375), who wrote that the Brenta River rises from the mountains of Carantania, a land in the Alps dividing Italy from Germany. [ Ethnic and social structure ] See main article: Carantanians The population of ancient Carantania had a polyethnic structure. The core stratum was represented by two groups of Slavs who had settled in the Eastern Alps region in late 6th century. Other ethnic elements included Croats, Dulebes and the descendants of the Romanised aboriginal peoples ( Norican s ), the latter which is attestable on the basis of a number of place names. It is also possible that traces of Avars, Bulgars and the Germanic peoples were present among Carantanians. The people of Carantania are considered to have been among the precursors and ancestors of modern Slovenes. [ Language ] The installation of the Dukes of Carinthia according to a Medieval chronicle In its early stages, the language of Carantanian Slavs was essentially Proto-Slavic. In Slovenian linguistic literature and reference books it is sometimes provisionally termed Alpine Slavic (alpska slovanščina). Its Proto-Slavic character can be deduced from language contacts of Alpine Slavs with the remainders of the Romanised aboriginal population, later also with Bavarians. The adopted Pre-Slavic placenames and rivernames and their subsequent phonetic development in Alpine Slavic, as well as Bavarian records of Alpine Slavic names, shed light on the characteristics of the Alpine Slavic language. From the 8th century onwards, Alpine Slavic underwent a series of gradual changes and innovations which were characteristic of South Slavic languages. By roughly the 13th century, these developments gave rise to the Slovene language. { Tine Logar, &quot; Pregled zgodovine slovenskega jezika &quot; (An Outline of the History of Slovene Language). In: Slovenski jezik, literatura in kultura. Ed.: Matjaž Kmecl et al. Ljubljana: Seminar slovenskega jezika, literature in kulture pri Oddelku za slovanske jezike in književnosti Filozofske fakultete Univerze, 1974, p. [103] -113. } [ See also ] Modestus (Apostle of Carantania) Black panther (symbol) Timeline of Slovenian history [ References ] [ Further sources ] Rajko Bratož, ur., Slovenija in sosednje dežele med antiko in karolinško dobo : začetki slovenske etnogeneze = Slowenien und die Nachbarländer zwischen Antike und karolingischer Epoche : Anfänge der slowenischen Ethnogenese, 2 zv. Ljubljana, 2000. Paul Gleirscher, Karantanien - das slawische Kärnten. Klagenfurt, 2000. ISBN 3-85378-511-5. Bogo Grafenauer, Ustoličevanje koroških vojvod in država karantanskih Slovencev : Die Kärntner Herzogseinsetzung und der Staat der Karantanerslawen. Ljubljana, 1952. Hans-Dietrich Kahl, Der Staat der Karantanen: Fakten, Thesen und Fragen zu einer frühen slawischen Machtbildung im Ostalpenraum, Ljubljana, 2002. Peter Štih, »Karantanci - zgodnjesrednjeveško ljudstvo med Vzhodom in Zahodom«, Zgodovinski časopis 61 (2007), s. 47-58. [ External links ] The Ducal Coronation Category:History of Slovenia Category:History of Austria be:Карантанія be-x-old:Карантанія bg:Карантания ca:Carantània da:Karantanien de:Karantanien el:Καραντανία es:Carantania eo:Karantanio fr:Carantanie gl:Carantania hr:Karantanija is:Karantanía ka:კარანტანია lt:Karantanija mk:Карантанија nl:Karantanië no:Karantania pl:Karantania ru:Карантания sl:Karantanija sr:Карантанија sh:Karantanija sv:Karantanien uk:Карантанія