{ crib ( } { szopka ) at the } { Main Market Square, Kraków during szopka tournament on first Thursday of each December } Nativity scene at the Christ the King Church in Sanok Christmas in Poland is a major annual celebration, as in most countries of the Western world. The observance of Christmas developed gradually over the centuries, beginning in ancient times; combining old pagan customs with the religious ones introduced after the Christianization of Poland by the Catholic Church. Later influences include mutual permeating of local traditions and various folk cultures. Unlike in many other Christian countries, St. Nicholas does not play a major role in Polish Christmas, but instead, is celebrated on his Saint feast day of December 6. [ Advent ] Among the special tasks carried out i private homes during Advent (a time of waiting for the celebration of the Nativity of Jesus ) is the baking of the Christmas piernik (gingerbread), and the making of Christmas decorations. Pierniki are made in a variety of shapes, including hearts, animals, and St. Nicholas figures. Old traditional decorations include handmade stars, decorated eggshells, colorful paper garlands, etc. Christmas Trees are decorated and lit in family rooms on the day of Christmas Eve. Other trees are placed in most public areas and outside churches. Traditionally the Christmas trees are decorated with hand blown glass bauble s, garlands, and many homemade ornaments including shiny red apples, walnuts, wrapped chocolate shapes, and candles. At the top of the tree there is a star or a glittering top piece. In many homes, sparkler s are hung on the branches of the trees for wintery ambiance. Sometimes the trees are left standing until February 2, the feast day of St. Mary of the Candle of Lightning. During Advent and all the way until Epiphany, or the baptism of Jesus (Sunday of January 6), the &quot; gwiazdory &quot;, or the star carriers walk through the villages. Some of them sing carols; others recite verses or put on &quot; szopki &quot; ( puppet show s ), or &quot; herody &quot; ( nativity scene s ). The last two customs are inspired by the traditional manger scenes or &quot; Jaselka &quot; ( crib ). One tradition unique to Poland is the sharing of the &quot; opłatek &quot;, a thin wafer into which a holy picture is pressed. In the old days people carried these wafers from house to house wishing their neighbors a Merry Christmas. Nowadays, opłatek is mostly shared with members of the family and immediate neighbors before the Christmas Eve supper ( Wigilia in the Polish language). As each person shares pieces of the wafer with another, they are supposed to forgive each other any hurts that have occurred over the past year and wish them happiness in the coming year. [ Święty Mikołaj, Santa Claus ] Tradition has it that Święty Mikołaj (Polish for Saint Nicholas) visits Polish households twice in December. The first time occurs on the morning of 6 December, when family members find their boots filled with candy. The second one happens on the evening of 24 December; gifts are placed under the Christmas tree, usually in the absence of Santa-believing children (many of whom are occupied with watching the sky in search of the first star) if there are any in the family. Unlike in many other European countries, the general image of Święty Mikołaj in Poland is basically no different to the one of the Anglo-Saxon Santa Claus (he is said to live in the North Pole, wear red clothes and a white beard, use reindeers to pull his sleigh, or enter houses via the chimney). More and more frequently can the American habit of having men dressed as Święte Mikołaje at malls to hear out children&apos;s requests be observed in Poland. [ Wigilia, the Christmas Eve supper ] Christmas Eve supper - dishes Christmas Eve deserts In Poland, Christmas Eve is a day first of fasting, then of feasting. The Wigilia feast begins at the appearance of the first star. There is no red meat served but fish, usually carp. The supper, which includes many traditional dishes and deserts, can sometimes last for over two hours. It is followed by the exchange of gifts. The next day, the Christmas Day, is often spent visiting friends. In Polish tradition, people combine religion and family closeness at Christmas. Although gift-giving plays a major role in the rituals, emphasis is placed more on the making of special foods and decorations. On the night of Christmas Eve, so important is the appearance of the first star in remembrance of the Star of Bethlehem, that it has been given an affectionate name of &quot; the little star &quot; or Gwiazdka (the female counterpart of St. Nicholas). On that evening, children watch the sky anxiously hoping to be the first to cry out, &quot; The star has come! &quot; Only after it appears, the family members sit down to a dinner table. According to tradition, bits of hay are spread beneath the tablecloth as a reminder that Christ was born in a manger. Others partake in the practice of placing money under the table cloth for each guest, in order to wish for prosperity in the coming year. Some practice the superstition that an even number of people must be seated around the table. In many homes an empty place setting is symbolically left at the table for the Baby Jesus or, for a lonely wanderer who may be in need of food, or if a deceased relative should come and would like to share in the meal. The supper begins with the breaking of the opłatek. Everyone at the table breaks off a piece and eats it as a symbol of their unity with Christ. They then share a piece with each family member. A tradition exists among some families to serve twelve different dishes at Wigilia symbolizing the Twelve Apostles, or perhaps, an odd number of dishes for good luck (usually five, seven, or nine). A traditional Christmas meal in Poland includes fried carp and borscht (beetroot soup) with uszka (ravioli). Carp provides a main component of the Christmas Eve meal across Poland; carp fillet, carp in aspic etc. Universal Polish Christmas foods are pierogi as well as some herring dishes, and for desert, makowiec or noodles with poppy seed. Often, there is a compote of dry fruits for a drink. The remainder of the evening is given to stories and songs around the Christmas tree. In some areas of the country, children are taught that &quot; The Little Star &quot; brings the gifts. As presents are unwrapped, carollers may walk from house to house receiving treats along the way. Christmas Eve ends with Pasterka, the midnight mass at the local church. The tradition commemorates the arrival of the Three Wise Men to Bethlehem and their paying of respect and bearing witness to the new born Messiah. The custom of Christmas night liturgy was introduced in the Christian churches after the second half of the 5th century. In Poland that custom arrived together with the coming of Christianity. { &quot; Boże Narodzenie i polskie tradycje, &quot; Polska Misja Katolicka, Amsterdam } [ Kolędy, the Christmas carols ] Christmas carols are not celebrated in Poland until after the Christmas Vigil Mass. The Christmas season often runs until February 2. The early religious hymns sung in Catholic church were brought to Poland by the Franciscan Brothers already in the Middle Ages. The early Christmas music was Latin in origin. When the Polish words and melodies started to become popular, including many new secular pastoral s (pastoralka, or shepherd&apos;s songs), they were not written down originally, but rather taught among people by heart. Many of these early Polish carols were collected in 1838 by Rev. Hioduszewki in a book called Pastorałki i Kolędy z Melodiami (Pastorals and Carols with Melodies). { Lorraine Grochowsa Kiefer, Christmas Kolędy - Polish Carols, at culture.polishsite.us } [ See also ] Bóg się rodzi Kraków szopka Wigilia the Christmas Eve vigil supper Christmas worldwide [ References ] [ Christmas in Poland ] Christmas in Poland - Polish Tradition Polish Christmas. Polish Kulture How to celebrate Christmas in Poland Boże Narodzenie, www.pmkamsterdam.nl (Polska Misja Katolicka, Amsterdam) Wigilia article from the Polish American Center Wigilia article from Pope John Paul II Polish Center Wigilia article from the Polish Museum of America Poland Christmas Eve