The Iapydes (or Iapodes, Japodes, Giapidi) ( Greek, &quot; Ιάποδες &quot; ) were an ancient people who dwelt north of and inland from the Liburnians, off the Adriatic coast and eastwards of the Istria n peninsula. They occupied the interior of the country between the Colapis ( Kupa ) and Oeneus ( Una ) rivers, and the Velebit mountain range (Mons Baebius) which separated them from the coastal Liburnians. Their territory covered the central inlands of modern Croatia and Una River Valley in today&apos;s Bosnia and Herzegovina. Archaeological documentation confirms their presence in these countries at least from ninth century BC, and they persisted in their area longer than a millennium. The ancient written documentation on inland Iapydes is scarcer than on the adjacent coastal peoples (Liburni, Delmatae, etc.) that had more frequent maritime contacts with ancient Greeks and Romans. Iapydes had their maximal development and territorial expansion from 8th-4th cent. BC. They settled mostly in inland mountain valleys between Pannonia and the coastal Adriatic basin, but in disputation with southern Liburni they periodically reached also the northern Adriatic coast at Vinodol valley (classical Valdevinum). The Iapydes were a mixed { A Classical Dictionary: Containing The Principle Proper Names Mentioned In Ancient Authors Part One by Charles Anthon,2005,page 539: &quot;... Tor, &quot; elevated, &quot; &quot; a mountain. &quot; -Strabo, 293); the Iapodes (Strabo, 313), a Gallo-Illyrian race occupying the val. leys of... &quot; } { Wilkes, J. J. The Illyrians, 1992,ISBN 0-631-19807-5,page 79, &quot; along with the evidence of name formulae, a Venetic element among the Japodes. A group of names identified by Alföldy as of Celtic origin: Ammida, Andes, Iaritus, Matera, Maxa, &quot; } nation of Celt s and Pannonian { The origins of the Europeans: classical observations in culture and personality by William Scott Shelley,1997,ISBN-1573092207,page 222,The Transalpine Iapydes, a Pannonian tribe, was both strong and savage } Illyrians with a strong Venetic element. { Wilkes, J.J. The Illyrians. Blackwell, 1992, ISBN 0-631-19807-5, p. 79. &quot;...along with the evidence of name formulae, a Venetic element among the Japodes. A group of names identified by Alföldy as of Celtic origin: Ammida, Andes, Iaritus, Matera, Maxa,... &quot; } They were later completely Celticized. [ Origin and affinity ] The exact origin of early Iapydes is uncertain; archaeological documentation suggests mixed affinities to early Pannonii and Illyrians. The first written mention of an Illyrian tribe Iapydes by Hekataios is from early Greek navigators from the 6th century BC. They are provisionally described by Strabo as a mixed race of Celts and Illyrians, who used Celtic weapons, tattoo ed themselves, and lived chiefly on spelt and millet; however, Strabo&apos;s suggestion of a mixed Celtic-Illyrian Iapydes culture is not confirmed by archaeology. Originally, Iapydes existed at least from the 9th century BC, and Celtic influence reached the region in the 4th century BC when Iapydes enter a decline. Archeological evidence of typical Celtic culture is documented only in the marginal contact zone of the Iapydes and the Celtic Taurisci along the Kupa river valley (now the Slovenia n - Croatia n border). Elsewhere, and especially in the main Iapydic area of the Lika highlands in Croatia, definite Celtic artifacts are scarce and explicable merely by commercial exchanges. [ Roman conquest ] { Liburnia during the 1st cent. AD } Romans said of the Iapyges that they were a warlike race addicted to plundering expeditions, but other archaeological documentation confirms their main economical activity was the mining and metallurgy. That attracted the pragmatic Romans to conquer their country, whose river valleys were also a natural way for strategic communications between the Adriatic and Pannonia. Therefore induced conflicts started from 171 BC, when consul C. Cassius Longinus first attacked Iapydes. In 129 BC D. Iunius Brutus celebrated a triumph over them, then in 78-76 BC they were also attacked by Gaius Cosconius. They have had a foedus from 56 BC with Rome and paid a tributum, but then from 52-47 BC rebelled. In 34 BC they were finally conquered by Octavius Augustus. Then they conserved a partial autonomy with a domestic praepositus Iapodum. [ Culture and society ] Due to the rich and extensive forests of their mountainous country, their houses were mostly wooden huts, and they rarely used stone constructions except in some major fortifications. Their settlements were mostly on hilltops, including between 400 - 3,000 dwellers, and the main Iapodic settlements in Roman times were Metulum, Terpon, Arupium and Avendo. They cultivated chiefly cereals and grapes, and kept varied cattle. Their early metallurgy developed a half millennium before Celtic influence that induced here minor modifications. Their society was simple including warriors, villagers, herdsmen, miners, and metalworkers. In that early phase neither leaders nor elite were indicated, and these independent Iapydes had no detectable collective political organisation. Under the Romans a Romanticized elite emerged, led by the praepositus Iapodum installed by Romans. Their classical culture was a varied mixture of Pannonian, Illyrian, Greek and Roman influences, mostly without proper peculiarities. Their figural art included the frequent metal decorations in form of triangles and spirals, and large amber pearls and amber figurines. The Iapydic language before the Romans is mostly unknown: the unique indications available are their toponyms and necropolis inscriptions from Roman times. These scarce onomastic indications suggest the Iapydic tongue may be correlated with other Illyrian and Pannonian tribes. During their independence, the Iapydes appear to have been completely illiterate and left no inscriptions before Roman times. [ Religion ] The original religion of Iapydes is scarcely known, and it appears to be similar with other eastward Illyrians. They knew the divine pair of water-deities Vidassus (as Roman Sylvanus ) and Thana (as Roman Diana ), whose rocky reliefs persist today at some springs in their area. They worshiped the holy horse as their tribal totem, and also the holy snakes as the symbol of their ancestors. Their early tombs were usually in caves, and then in Roman times often in woody sarcophagi and also incinerated in ceramic urns. [ See also ] [ Croatia Bosnia and Herzegovina ] Illyrians Liburnians Adriatic Veneti Celts Croatia Ancient Rome [ References ] [ Sources ] Mitja Gustin et al.: Keltoi in Yugoslavia (Die Kelten und ihre Zeitgenossen auf dem Gebiet Jugoslawiens). Narodni muzej, Ljubljana 1984. Radoslav Katicic: Zur Frage der keltischen und pannonischen Namengebiete im römischen Dalmatien. Godisnjak (Annuaire) 3, 55 p., Centar za balkanoloske studije, Sarajevo 1965. [ Illyria &amp; Illyrians ] Category:Ancient peoples Category:Celtic culture Category:Celtic people Category:Historical ethnic groups of Europe Category:Indo-European peoples Category:History of Bosnia and Herzegovina Category:Ancient tribes in Croatia Category:History of Slovenia Category:Ancient tribes in Bosnia and Herzegovina bs:Japodi bg:Яподи ca:Iapods fr:Iapydes hr:Japodi it:Iapodi ru:Яподы sq:Japodët sl:Japodi sr:Јаподи sh:Japodi sv:japoder