[ Dippers Cinclus mexicanus FWS.jpg American Dipper Animal ia Chordata Aves Passeriformes Passeri Cinclidae Sundevall, 1836 Cinclus Borkhausen, 1797 Species *Cinclus cinclus*Cinclus leucocephalus*Cinclus mexicanus*Cinclus pallasii*Cinclus schulzi ] Dippers are members of the genus Cinclus in the bird family Cinclidae, named for their bobbing or dipping movements. They are unique among passerine s for their ability to dive and swim underwater. [ Description ] Eurasian White-fronted Dipper, C cinclus Dippers are small, stout, short-tailed, short-winged, strong-legged birds. The different species are generally dark brown (sometimes nearly black), or brown and white in colour, apart from the Rufous-throated Dipper which is brown with a reddish-brown throat patch. Sizes range from 14–22  cm in length and 40-90 g in weight, with males larger than females. Their short wings give them a distinctive whirring flight. { Whistler, Hugh. (2007). Popular Handbook of Indian Birds. British Museum Natural History: London. 4th edition. ISBN 1-4067-4576-6 } { Robbins, C.S.; Bruun, B.; &amp; Zim, H.S. (1966). Birds of North America. Western Publishing Company: New York. } They have a characteristic bobbing motion when perched beside the water, giving them their name. [ Distribution and habitat ] Dippers are found in suitable freshwater habitats in the highlands of the Americas, Europe and Asia. In Africa they are only found in the Atlas Mountains of Morocco. They inhabit the banks of fast-moving upland rivers with cold, clear waters, though, outside the breeding season, they may visit lake shores and sea coasts. [ Adaptations ] Unlike many water birds, dippers are generally similar in form to many terrestrial birds (for example they do not have webbed feet), but they do have some morphological and physiological adaptations to their aquatic habits. Their wings are relatively short but strongly muscled, enabling them to be used as flippers underwater. They have dense plumage with a large preen gland for waterproofing their feathers. Relatively long legs and sharp claws enable them to hold onto rocks in swift water. Their eyes have well-developed focus muscles that can change the curvature of the lens to enhance underwater vision. [ Goodge W.R. Adaptations for amphibious vision in the Dipper (Cinclus mexicanus) J. Morphol. 107 79–91 1960 10.1002/jmor.1051070106 13707012 ] They have nasal flaps to prevent water entering their nostrils. Their blood has a high haemoglobin concentration, allowing a greater capacity to store oxygen than terrestrial birds, and allowing them to remain underwater for up to at least 30 seconds. { Tyler, Stephanie J.; &amp; Ormerod, Stephen J. (1994). The Dippers. Poyser: London. ISBN 0-85661-093-3 } [ Behaviour ] [ Food ] Dippers forage for small animal prey in and along the margins of fast-flowing freshwater streams and rivers. They perch on rocks and feed at the edge of the water, but they often also grip the rocks firmly and walk down them beneath the water until partly or wholly submerged. They then search underwater for prey between and beneath stones and debris; they can also swim with their wings. The two South American species swim and dive less often than the three northern ones. [ Tyler S.J. The Yungas of Argentina: in search of Rufous-throated Dippers Cinclus schulzi) Cotinga 2 38–41 1994 ] Their prey consists primarily of invertebrate s such as the nymph s or larva e of mayflies, blackflies, stoneflies and caddisflies, as well as small fish and fish eggs. Mollusc s and crustacean s are also consumed, especially in winter when insect larvae are less available. [ Breeding ] Linear breeding territories are established by pairs of dippers along suitable rivers, and maintained against incursion by other dippers. Within their territory the pair must have a good nest site and roost sites, but the main factor affecting the length of the territory is the availability of sufficient food to feed themselves and their broods. Consequently the length of a territory may vary from about 300 m to over 2500 m. Dipper nests are usually large, round, domed structures made of moss, with an internal cup of grass and rootlets, and a side entrance hole. They are often built in confined spaces over, or close to, running water. The site may be on a ledge or bank, in a crevice or drainpipe, or beneath a bridge. Tree sites are rare. The usual clutch-size of the three northern dipper species is 4-5; those of the southern species is not well known, though some evidence suggests that that of the Rufous-throated Dipper is 2. [ Salvador S. Narosky, S.; &amp; Fraga, R. First description of the nest and eggs of the Red-throated Dipper in northwestern Argentina Gerfaut 76 63–66 1986 ] The incubation period of 16–17 days is followed by the hatching of altricial young which are brooded by the female alone for the next 12–13 days. The nestlings are fed by both parents and the whole fledging period is about 20–24 days. Young dippers usually become independent of their parents within a couple of weeks of leaving the nest. Dippers may raise second broods if conditions allow. [ Communication ] Dippers’ calls are loud and high-pitched, being similar to calls made by other birds on fast rivers; the call frequencies lying within a narrow range of 4.0-6.5 kHz, well above the torrent noise frequency of &lt; 2  kHz. [ Martens J. Geduldig, G. Acoustic adaptations of birds living close to Himalayan torrents Proc. Int. 100 DO-G Meeting 123–131 Current Topics Avian Biol. 1990 Bonn ] Dippers also communicate visually by their characteristic dipping or bobbing movements, as well as by blinking rapidly to expose their pale upper eyelid s as a series of white flashes in courtship and threat displays. { Creutz, G. (1966). Die Wasseramsel. A. Ziensen: Wittenburg Lutherstadt. } [ Conservation ] Dippers are completely dependent on fast-flowing rivers with clear water, accessible food and secure nest-sites. They may be threatened by anything that affects these needs such as water pollution, acidification and turbidity caused by erosion. River regulation through the creation of dam s and reservoir s, as well as channelization, can degrade and destroy dipper habitat. Dippers are also sometimes hunted or otherwise persecuted by humans for various reasons. The Cyprus race of the White-throated Dipper is extinct. In the Atlas Mountains dippers are claimed to have aphrodisiac al properties. In parts of Scotland and Germany, until the beginning of the 20th century, bounties were paid for killing dippers because of a misguided perception that they were detrimental to fish stocks through predation on the eggs and fry of salmonid s. Despite threats to local populations, the conservation status of most dipper species is considered to be of least concern. The one exception, the Rufous-throated Dipper, is classified as vulnerable because of its small, fragmented and declining population which is threatened, especially in Argentina, by changes in river management. { BirdLife International (2007) Species factsheet: &apos;&apos;Cinclus schulzi&apos;&apos;. Downloaded from http://www.birdlife.org on 14/3/2008 } [ Taxonomy ] Cinclus is the only genus in the family Cinclidae. The White-throated Dipper and American Dipper are also known in Britain and America, respectively, as the Water Ouzel (sometimes spelt &quot; ousel &quot; ) – ouzel originally meant the unrelated but superficially similar Eurasian Blackbird ( Old English osle). Ouzel also survives as the name of a relative of the Blackbird, the Ring Ouzel. { List of Old English bird names } [ Species in taxonomic order ] White-throated Dipper or European Dipper, Cinclus cinclus Brown Dipper Cinclus pallasii American Dipper Cinclus mexicanus White-capped Dipper Cinclus leucocephalus Rufous-throated Dipper Cinclus schulzi [ References ] Mullarney, Svensson, Zetterstrom and Grant, Collins Bird Guide ISBN 0-00-219728-6 [ External links ] ITIS - Cinclus Dipper pictures in nature photographer Janne Heimonen&apos;s photo gallery Dipper videos on the Internet Bird Collection Dipper sounds on xeno-canto.org * * [ de ] kbd:Псыбзухэр br:Dourlaouig ca:Cínclid cs:Skorec da:Vandstære de:Wasseramseln es:Cinclidae eo:Cinkledoj fr:Cinclidae ga:Gabha dubh ko:물까마귀과 hr:Brljci it:Cinclus kk:Сушылқаралар sw:Mkesha-maji lt:Vandeniniai strazdai hu:Vízirigófélék nl:Waterspreeuwen ja:カワガラス科 no:Fossekaller nn:Fossekallfamilien pl:Pluszcze pt:Cinclidae qu:Mayusuksu ru:Оляпковые sh:Brljci fi:Koskikarat sv:Strömstarar tr:Su karatavuğugiller uk:Пронурок (рід) zh:河乌属