{ Jean Auguste Dominique Ingres, c. 1805 } Oedipus ( [ icon us ˈ ɛ d ɨ p ə s ] or [ uk ˈ iː d ɨ p ə s ]; [ Οἰδίπους ] Oidípous meaning &quot; swollen foot &quot; ) was a mythical Greek king of Thebes. He fulfilled a prophecy that said he would kill his father and marry his mother, and thus brought disaster on his city and family. This legend has been retold in many versions, and was used by Sigmund Freud to name the Oedipus complex. [ Basics of the myth ] There are many different versions of the legend of Oedipus due to its oral tradition. Significant variations on the legend of Oedipus are mentioned in fragments by several ancient Greek poets including Homer, Hesiod, Pindar, Aeschylus and Euripides. However, the most popular version of the legend comes from the set of Theban plays by Sophocles : Oedipus the King, Oedipus at Colonus, and Antigone. Oedipus was the son of Laius and Jocasta, king and queen of Thebes. After having been married some time without children, Laius consulted the Oracle of Apollo at Delphi. The Oracle prophesied that any son born to Laius would kill him. In an attempt to prevent this prophecy&apos;s fulfillment, when Jocasta indeed bore a son, Laius had his ankles pinned together so that he could not crawl; Jocasta then gave the boy to a servant to abandon ( &quot; expose &quot; ) on the nearby mountain. However, rather than leave the child to die of exposure, as Laius intended, the sympathetic servant passed the baby onto a shepherd from Corinth and then to another shepherd. Oedipus the infant eventually came to the house of Polybus, king of Corinth and his queen, Merope, who adopted him as they were without children of their own. Little Oedipus/Oidipous was named after the swelling from the injuries to his feet and ankles. The word oedema (British English) or edema (American English) is from this same Greek word for swelling: οἴδημα, or oedēma. After many years of being son of the king and queen of Corinth, Oedipus was told by a drunk that Oedipus was in fact adopted by them. Oedipus confronted his parents with the news, but they denied every word. Oedipus sent word for the same Oracle in Delphi his birth parents consulted. The Oracle didn&apos;t tell him he was son of the king and queen of Thebes, but instead informed him he was destined to murder his father and marry his mother. In his attempt to avoid the fate predicted by the Oracle, he decided to not return home to Corinth. Oedipus decided to travel all the way to Thebes, as it was near Delphi. As Oedipus traveled, he came to Davlia, where three roads crossed each other. Here he encountered a chariot driven by his birth-father, King Laius. They fought over who had the right to go first and Oedipus killed Laius in self defense, unwittingly fulfilling part of the prophecy. The only witness of the King&apos;s death was a slave who fled from a caravan of slaves also traveling on the road at the time. Continuing his journey to Thebes, Oedipus encountered a Sphinx, who would stop all travelers to Thebes and ask them a riddle. If the travelers were unable to answer her correctly, they would be killed and eaten; if they were successful, they would be free to continue on their journey. The riddle was: &quot; What walks on four feet in the morning, two in the afternoon and three at night? &quot;. Oedipus answered: &quot; Man: as an infant, he crawls on all fours; as an adult, he walks on two legs and; in old age, he uses a &apos;walking&apos; stick &quot;. Oedipus was the first to answer the riddle correctly and, having heard Oedipus&apos; answer, the Sphinx was astounded and inexplicably killed herself by throwing herself into the sea, freeing Thebes from her harsh rule. The people of Thebes gratefully appointed Oedipus as their king and gave him the recently widowed Queen Jocasta&apos;s hand in marriage. The marriage of Oedipus to Jocasta fulfilled the rest of the prophecy. Oedipus and Jocasta had four children: two sons, Eteocles and Polynices (see Seven Against Thebes ), and two daughters, Antigone and Ismene. Many years after the marriage of Oedipus and Jocasta, a plague of infertility struck the city of Thebes; crops no longer grew on the fields and women did not bear children. Oedipus, in his hubris, asserted that he would end the pestilence. He sent Creon, Jocasta&apos;s brother, to the Oracle at Delphi, seeking guidance. When Creon returned, Oedipus heard that the murderer of the former King Laius must be found and either be killed or exiled. Creon also suggested that they try to find the blind prophet, Tiresias. In a search for the identity of the killer, Oedipus followed Creon&apos;s suggestion and sent for Tiresias, who warned him not to seek Laius&apos; killer. In a heated exchange, Tiresias was provoked into exposing Oedipus himself as the killer, and the fact that Oedipus was living in shame because he did not know who his true parents were. Oedipus angrily blamed Creon for the false accusations, and the two proceeded to argue fervently. Jocasta entered and tried to calm Oedipus by telling him the story of her first-born son and his supposed death. Oedipus became nervous as he realized that he may have murdered Laius and so brought about the plague. Suddenly, a messenger arrived from Corinth with the news that King Polybus had died. Oedipus was relieved concerning the prophecy for it could no longer be fulfilled if Polybus, whom he considered his birth father, was now dead. Still, he knew that his mother was still alive and refused to attend the funeral at Corinth. To ease the tension, the messenger then said that Oedipus was, in fact, adopted. Jocasta, finally realizing that he was her son, begged him to stop his search for Laius&apos; murderer. Oedipus misunderstood the motivation of her pleas, thinking that she was ashamed of him because he might have been born of a slave. Jocasta then went into the palace where she hanged herself. Oedipus sought verification of the messenger&apos;s story from the very same herdsman who was supposed to have left Oedipus to die as a baby. From the herdsman, Oedipus learned that the infant raised as the adopted son of Polybus and Merope was the son of Laius and Jocasta. Thus, Oedipus finally realized in great agony that so many years ago, at the place where the three roads met, he had killed his own father, King Laius, and subsequently married his mother, Jocasta. Events after the revelation depend on the source. In Sophocles &apos; plays, Oedipus went in search of Jocasta and found she had killed herself. Using the pin from a brooch he took off Jocasta&apos;s gown, Oedipus stabbed his own eyes out, and was then exiled. His daughter Antigone acted as his guide as he wandered blindly through the country, finally perishing at Colonus after being placed under the protection of Athens by King Theseus. However, in Euripides &apos; plays on the subject, Jocasta did not kill herself upon learning of Oedipus&apos; birth, and Oedipus was blinded by a servant of Laius. And the blinding of Oedipus does not appear in sources earlier than Aeschylus. Some older sources of the myth, including Homer, state that Oedipus continued to rule Thebes after the revelations and after Jocasta&apos;s death. Oedipus&apos; two sons, Eteocles and Polynices, arranged to share the kingdom, each taking an alternating one-year reign. However, Eteocles refused to cede his throne after his year as king. Polynices brought in an army to oust Eteocles from his position and a battle ensued. At the end of the battle the brothers killed each other after which Jocasta&apos;s brother, Creon, took the throne. He decided that Polynices was a &quot; traitor, &quot; and should not be given burial rites. Defying this edict, Antigone attempted to bury her brother. In Sophocles&apos; Antigone, Creon had her buried in a rock cavern for defying him, whereupon she hanged herself. However, in Euripides&apos; lost version of the story, it appears that Antigone survives. [ 5th century BC ] [ 1887,0801.46 464402 ] Most writing on Oedipus comes from the 5th century BC, though the stories deal mostly with Oedipus&apos; downfall. Various details appeared on how Oedipus rose to power. Laius heard of a prophecy that his son will kill him. { Euripides, Phoenissae } Fearing the prophecy, Laius pierces Oedipus&apos; feet and leaves him out to die, but a herdsman finds him and takes him away from Thebes. { Sophocles, Oedipus the King 1220-1226; Euripides, Phoenissae } Oedipus, not knowing he was adopted, leaves home in fear of the same prophecy that he would kill his father and marry his mother. { Sophocles, Oedipus the King 1026-1030; Euripides, Phoenissae } Laius, meanwhile, ventures out to find a solution to the Sphinx&apos;s riddle. { Sophocles, Oedipus the King 132-137 } As prophesied, Oedipus crossed paths with Laius and this leads to a fight where Oedipus slays Laius and most of his guards. { Pindar, Second Olympian Ode; Sophocles, Oedipus the King 473-488; Euripides, Phoenissae } Oedipus then defeats the Sphinx by solving a mysterious riddle to become king. { Sophocles, Oedipus the King 136, 1578; Euripides, Phoenissae } He marries the widow queen Jocasta not knowing she is his mother. A plague falls on the people of Thebes. Upon discovery of the truth, Oedipus blinds himself and Jocasta hangs herself. { Sophocles, Oedipus the King 1316 } After Oedipus is no longer king, Oedipus&apos; sons kill each other. Some differences with older stories emerge. The curse of the Oedipus&apos; sons is expanded backward to include Oedipus and his father, Laius. Oedipus now steps down from the throne instead of dying in battle. Additionally, rather than his children being by a second wife, Oedipus&apos; children are now by Jocasta. [ Pindar&apos;s Second Olympian Ode ] In the Second Olympians Ode Pindar wrote:Laius&apos; tragic son, crossing his father&apos;s path, killed him and fulfilled the oracle spoken of old at Pytho. And sharp-eyed Erinys saw and slew his warlike children at each other&apos;s hands. Yet Thersandros survived fallen Polyneikes and won honor in youthful contests and the brunt of war, a scion of aid to the house of Adrastos.. { Pindar, Second Olympian Ode } [ Aeschylus&apos; Oedipus trilogy ] In 467 BC the Athenian playwright, Aeschylus, is known to have presented an entire trilogy based upon the Oedipus myth, winning the first prize at the City Dionysia. The First play was Laius, the second was Oedipus, and the third was Seven against Thebes. Only the third play survives, in which Oedipus&apos; sons Eteocles and Polynices kill each other warring over the throne. Much like his Oresteia, this trilogy would have detailed the tribulations of a House over three successive generations. The satyr play that followed the trilogy was called the Sphinx. [ Sophocles&apos; Oedipus the King ] As Sophocles &apos; Oedipus the King begins, the people of Thebes are begging the king for help, begging him to discover the cause of the plague. Oedipus stands before them and swears to find the root of their suffering and to end it. Just then, Creon returns to Thebes from a visit to the oracle. Apollo has made it known that Thebes is harboring a terrible abomination and that the plague will only be lifted when the true murderer of old King Laius is discovered and punished for his crime. Oedipus swears to do this, not realizing of course that he himself is the abomination that he has sworn to exorcise. The stark truth emerges slowly over the course of the play, as Oedipus clashes with the blind seer Tiresias, who senses the truth. Oedipus remains in strict denial, though, becoming convinced that Tiresias is somehow plotting with Creon to usurp the throne. Realization begins to slowly dawn in Scene II of the play when Jocasta mentions out of hand that Laius was slain at a place where three roads meet. This stirs something in Oedipus&apos; memory and he suddenly remembers the men that he fought and killed one day long ago at a place where three roads met. He realizes, horrified, that he might be the man he&apos;s seeking. One household servant survived the attack and now lives out his old age in a frontier district of Thebes. Oedipus sends immediately for the man to either confirm or deny his guilt. At the very worst, though, he expects to find himself to be the unsuspecting murderer of a man unknown to him. The truth has not yet been made clear. The moment of epiphany comes late in the play. At the beginning of Scene III, Oedipus is still waiting for the servant to be brought into the city, when a messenger arrives from Corinth to declare the King Polybus is dead. Oedipus, when he hears this news is overwhelmed with relief, because he believed that Polybus was the father whom the oracle had destined him to murder, and he momentarily believes himself to have escaped fate. He tells this all to the present company, including the messenger, but the messenger knows that it is not true. He is the man who found Oedipus as a baby in the pass of Kithairon and gave him to King Polybus to raise. He reveals, furthermore that the servant who is being brought to the city as they speak is the very same man who took Oedipus up into the mountains as a baby. Jocasta realizes now all that has happened. She begs Oedipus not to pursue the matter further. He refuses, and she withdraws into the palace as the servant is arriving. The old man arrives, and it is clear at once that he knows everything. At the behest of Oedipus, he tells it all. Overwhelmed with the knowledge of all his crimes, Oedipus rushes into the palace, where he finds his mother, his wife, dead by her own hand. Ripping a brooch from her dress, Oedipus blinds himself with it. Bleeding from the eyes, he begs Creon, who has just arrived on the scene, to exile him forever from Thebes. Creon agrees to this request, Oedipus begs to hold his two daughters Antigone and Ismene with his hands one more time to have their fill of tears and Creon out of pity sends the girls in to see Oedipus one more time. [ Sophocles&apos; Oedipus at Colonus ] right In Sophocles&apos; Oedipus at Colonus, Oedipus becomes a wanderer, pursued by Creon and his men. He finally finds refuge at the holy wilderness right outside of Athens, where it is said that Theseus took care of the two of them, Oedipus and his daughter, Antigone. Creon eventually catches up to Oedipus. He asks Oedipus to come back from Colonus to bless his son, Eteocles. Angry that his son did not love him enough to take care of him, he curses both Eteocles and his brother, condemning both to sudden deaths. Oedipus dies a peaceful death; his grave is said to be sacred to the gods. [ Sophocles&apos; Antigone ] In Sophocles&apos; Antigone, when Oedipus stepped down as king of Thebes, he gave the kingdom to his two sons, Eteocles and Polynices, both of whom agreed to alternate the throne every year. However, they showed no concern for their father, who cursed them for their negligence. After the first year, Eteocles refused to step down and Polynices attacked Thebes with his supporters (as portrayed in the Seven Against Thebes by Aeschylus and the Phoenician Women by Euripides ). Both brothers died in the battle. King Creon, who ascended to the throne of Thebes, decreed that Polynices was not to be buried. Antigone, Polynices&apos; sister, defied the order, but was caught. Creon decreed that she was to be put into a stone box in the ground, this in spite of her betrothal to his son Haemon. Antigone&apos;s sister, Ismene, then declared she had aided Antigone and wanted the same fate, but Creon eventually declined executing her. The gods, through the blind prophet Tiresias, expressed their disapproval of Creon&apos;s decision, which convinced him to rescind his order, and he went to bury Polynices himself. However, Antigone had already hanged herself in her tomb, rather than suffering the slow death of being buried alive. When Creon arrived at the tomb where she had been interred, his son Haemon attacked him upon seeing the body of his deceased fiancée, but failing to kill Creon he killed himself. When Creon&apos;s wife, Eurydice, was informed of the death of Haemon, she too took her own life. [ Euripides&apos; Phoenissae, Chrysippus and Oedipus ] In the beginning of Euripides &apos; Phoenissae, Jocasta recalls the story of Oedipus. Generally, the play weaves together the plots of the Seven Against Thebes and Antigone. The play differs from the other tales in two major respects. First, it describes in detail why Laius and Oedipus had a feud: Laius ordered Oedipus out of the road so his chariot could pass, but proud Oedipus refused to move. Second, in the play Jocasta has not killed herself at the discovery of her incest - otherwise she could not play the prologue, for fathomable reasons - nor has Oedipus fled into exile, but they have stayed in Thebes only to delay their doom until the fatal duel of their sons/brothers/nephews Eteocles and Polynices : Jocasta commits suicide over the two men&apos;s dead bodies, and Antigone follows Oedipus into exile. In Chrysippus, Euripides develops backstory on the curse: Laius&apos; &quot; sin &quot; was to have kidnapped Chrysippus, Pelops &apos; son, in order to violate him, and this caused the gods&apos; revenge on all his family - boy-loving having been so far an exclusive of the gods themselves, unknown to mortals. Euripides wrote also an &quot; Oedipus &quot;, of which only a few fragments survive. { R. Kannicht, Tragicorum Graecorum Fragmenta (TrGF) vol. 5.1, Göttingen 2004; see also F. Jouan - H. Van Looy, &quot; Euripide. tome 8.2 - Fragments &quot;, Paris 2000 } The first line of the prologue recalled Laius&apos; hubristic action of conceiving a son against Apollo&apos;s command. At some point in the action of the play, a character engaged in a lengthy and detailed description of the Sphinx and her riddle - preserved in five fragments from Oxyrhynchus, P.Oxy. 2459 (published by Eric Gardner Turner in 1962). { Reviewed by } { Hugh Lloyd-Jones in &quot; Gnomon &quot; 35 (1963), pp. 446-447 } The tragedy featured also many moral maxims on the theme of marriage, preserved in the Anthologion of Stobaeus. The most striking lines, however, state that in this play Oedipus was blinded by Laius&apos; attendants, and that this happened before his identity as Laius&apos; son had been discovered, therefore marking important differences with the Sophoclean treatment of the myth, which is now regarded as the &apos;standard&apos; version. Many attempts have been made to reconstruct the plot of the play, but none of them is more than hypothetical, because of the scanty remains that survive from its text and of the total absence of ancient descriptions or résumés - though it has been suggested that a part of Hyginus &apos; narration of the Oedipus myth might in fact derive from Euripides&apos; play. Some echoes of the Euripidean Oedipus have been traced also in a scene of Seneca&apos;s Oedipus (see below), in which Oedipus himself describes to Jocasta his adventure with the Sphinx. { Joachim Dingel, in &quot; Museum Helveticum &quot; 27 (1970), 90-96 } [ Other playrights ] At least three other 5th century authors who were younger than Sophocles wrote plays about Oedipus. These include Achaeus of Eretria, Nichomachus and the elder Xenocles. [ Sophocles and the Greek Tragic Tradition Goldhill, S. &amp; Hall, E. Burian, P. Inconclusive Conclusion: the Ending(s) of Oedipus Tyrannus 100 2009 Cambridge University Press 978-0-521-88785-4 ] [ Later additions ] The Bibliotheca, a Roman-era mythological handbook, writes down an actual riddle for the Sphinx while borrowing the poetry of Hesiod : What is that which has one voice and yet becomes four-footed and two-footed and three-footed? { Bibliotheca III.5.7 } [ Later Addition to Aeschylus&apos; Seven against Thebes ] Due to the popularity of Sophocles&apos;s Antigone (c. 442 BC), the ending (lines 1005-78) of Seven against Thebes was added some fifty years after Aeschylus&apos; death. { See (e.g.) Brown 1976, 206-19. } Whereas the play (and the trilogy of which it is the last play) was meant to end with somber mourning for the dead brothers, the spurious ending features a herald announcing the prohibition against burying Polyneices, and Antigone&apos;s declaration that she will defy that edict [ Oedipus in post-Classical literature ] Oedipus was a figure who was also used in the Latin literature of ancient Rome. Julius Caesar wrote a play on Oedipus, but it has not survived into modern times. { E.F. Watling&apos;s Introduction to Seneca: Four Tragedies and Octavia } Ovid included Oedipus in Metamorphoses, but only as the person who defeated the Sphinx. He makes no mention of Oedipus&apos; troubled experiences with his father and mother. Seneca the Younger wrote his own play on the story of Oedipus in the first century AD. It differs in significant ways from the work of Sophocles. Seneca&apos;s play on the myth was intended to be recited at private gatherings and not actually performed. It has however been successfully staged since the Renaissance. It was adapted by John Dryden in his very successful heroic drama Oedipus, licensed in 1678. The 1718 Oedipus was also the first play written by Voltaire. A version of Oedipus by Frank McGuinness was performed at the National Theatre in late 2008, starring Ralph Fiennes and Claire Higgins. In 1960, Immanuel Velikovsky (1895–1979) published a book called Oedipus and Akhnaton which made a comparison between the stories of the legendary Greek figure, Oedipus, and the historic Egyptian King of Thebes, Akhnaton. The book is presented as a thesis that combines with Velikovsky&apos;s series Ages in Chaos, concluding through his revision of Egyptian history that the Greeks who wrote the tragedy of Oedipus may have penned it in likeness of the life and story of Akhnaton, because in the revision Akhnaton would have lived much closer to the time when the legend first surfaced in Greece, providing an historical basis for the story. Each of the major characters in the Greek story are identified with the people involved in Akhnaton&apos;s family and court, and some interesting parallels are drawn. [ Oedipus or Oedipais? ] It has been suggested by some [ May 2012 ] that in the earliest Ur-myth of the hero, he was called Oedipais: &quot; child of the swollen sea. &quot; { See (e.g.) Lowry 1995, 879; Carloni/Nobili 2004, 147 n.1. } He was so named because of the method by which his birth parents tried to abandon him—by placing him in a chest and tossing it into the ocean. The mythic topos of forsaking a child to the sea or a river is well attested, found (e.g.) in the myths of Perseus, Telephus, Dionysus, Romulus and Remus and Moses. { This version of the Oedipus myth is in fact attested in some } { scholia (at lines 13 and 26) to } { Euripides &apos; } { Phoenician Women. } Over the centuries, however, Oedipais seems to have been corrupted into the familiar Oedipus: &quot; swollen foot. &quot; And it was this new name that might have inspired the addition of a bizarre element to the story of Oedipus&apos; abandonment on Mt. Cithaeron. Exposure on a mountain was in fact a common method of child abandonment in Ancient Greece. The binding of baby Oedipus&apos; ankles, however, is unique; it can thus be argued that the ankle-binding was inelegantly grafted onto the Oedipus myth simply to explain his new name. [ The Oedipus complex ] [ Oedipus complex ] [ Electra complex ] Sigmund Freud used the name The Oedipus complex to explain the origin of certain neuroses in childhood. It is defined as a male child&apos;s unconscious desire for the exclusive love of his mother. This desire includes jealousy towards the father and the unconscious wish for that parent&apos;s death, as well as the unconscious desire for sexual intercourse with the mother. Oedipus himself, as portrayed in the myth, did not suffer from this neurosis – at least, not towards Jocasta, whom he only met as an adult (if anything, such feelings would have been directed at Merope – but there is no hint of that). Freud reasoned that the ancient Greek audience, which heard the story told or saw the plays based on it, did know that Oedipus was actually killing his father and marrying his mother; the story being continually told and played therefore reflected a preoccupation with the theme. [ Bruno Bettelheim Freud and Man&apos;s Soul Knopf 1983 0-394-52481-0 ] The term oedipism is used in medicine for serious self inflicted eye injury, an extremely rare form of severe self-harm. [ See also ] [ Oedipus ] [ Greek mythology ] Antigone Epigoni Genetic attraction Myrrha (the Greek myth of incestual love between father and daughter) Oedipus at Colonus Oedipus Complex Oedipus the King Lille Stesichorus [ Notes ] [ 2 ] [ References ] Brown, A.L. &quot; The End of the Seven against Thebes &quot; The Classical Quarterly 26.2 (1976) 206-19. Carloni, Glauco and Nobili, Daniela. La Mamma Cattiva: fenomenologia, antropologia e clinica del figlicidio (Rimini, 2004). Dallas, Ian, Oedipus and Dionysus, Freiburg Press, Granada 1991. ISBN 1-874216-02-9. Graves, Robert, The Greek Myths Lowry, Malcolm. Sursum Corda!: The Collected Letters of Malcolm Lowry (Toronto, 1995). Rotimi, Ola. The Gods are Not to Blame, Three Crown Books, Nigeria 1974. Smith, William; Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology, London (1873). &quot; Oe&apos;dipus &quot; [ Laius Mythical King of Thebes Creon ] Category:Greek mythology Category:Greek mythological hero cult Category:Theban kings Category:Greek regicides Category:Incest in mythology Category:Fictional blind characters af:Oidipus ar:أوديب az:Edip be:Эдып bg:Едип bar:Edipus bs:Edip ca:Èdip cs:Oidipus da:Ødipus de:Ödipus et:Oidipus el:Οιδίποδας es:Edipo eo:Edipo eu:Edipo fa:ادیپ fr:Œdipe gl:Edipo ko:오이디푸스 hr:Edip id:Oidipus it:Edipo he:אדיפוס ka:ოიდიპოსი la:Oedipus lb:Ödipus lt:Edipas hu:Oidipusz mk:Едип ml:ഈഡിപ്പസ് nl:Oedipus ja:オイディプース no:Oidipus nn:Ødipus pl:Edyp pt:Édipo ro:Oedip ru:Эдип sq:Edipi scn:Edipu simple:Oedipus sk:Oidipus sr:Едип sh:Edip fi:Oidipus sv:Oidipus tl:Edipo th:เอดิปุส tr:Oedipus uk:Едіп ur:اڈیپس vi:Oedipus yi:עדיפוס zh:俄狄浦斯