A solderless breadboard with a completed circuit { TRF radio manufactured by Signal is constructed on a wooden breadboard } A breadboard (protoboard) is a construction base for prototyping of electronics. The term is commonly used to refer to solderless breadboard (plugboard). Because the solderless breadboard does not require soldering, it is reusable. This makes it easy to use for creating temporary prototypes and experimenting with circuit design. Older breadboard types did not have this property. A stripboard (veroboard) and similar prototyping printed circuit board s, which are used to build permanent soldered prototypes or one-offs, cannot easily be reused. A variety of electronic systems may be prototyped by using breadboards, from small analog and digital circuits to complete central processing unit s (CPUs). A binary counter wired up on a large solderless breadboard { printed circuit board ) is similar to the node pattern of the solderless breadboards shown above. } [ Evolution ] In the early days of radio, amateurs nailed bare copper wires or terminal strips to a wooden board (often literally a cutting board for bread) and soldered electronic components to them. { Description of the term breadboard } Sometimes a paper schematic diagram was first glued to the board as a guide to placing terminals, then components and wires were installed over their symbols on the schematic. Using thumbtacks or small nails as mounting posts was also common. Breadboards have evolved over time, with the term now being used for all kinds of prototype electronic devices. For example, US Patent 3,145,483, [ 3145483 ] { Test Board for Electronic Circuits } filed in 1961 and granted in 1964, describes a wooden plate breadboard with mounted springs and other facilities. US Patent 3,496,419, [ 3496419 ] { Printed Circuit Breadboard }, filed in 1967 and granted in 1970, refers to a particular printed circuit board layout as a Printed Circuit Breadboard. Both examples refer to and describe other types of breadboards as prior art. The breadboard most commonly used today is usually made of white plastic and is a pluggable (solderless) breadboard. It was designed by Ronald J Portugal of EI Instruments Inc. in 1971. [ D228136 1973 08 14 Ronald J. Portugal breadboard for electronic components or the like ] [ Solderless breadboard ] [ Typical specifications ] A modern solderless breadboard consists of a perforated block of plastic with numerous tin plated phosphor bronze or nickel silver alloy spring clips under the perforations. The clips are often called tie points or contact points. The number of tie points is often given in the specification of the breadboard. The spacing between the clips (lead pitch) is typically 0.1 &quot; (2.54 mm). Integrated circuit s (ICs) in dual in-line package s (DIPs) can be inserted to straddle the centerline of the block. Interconnecting wires and the leads of discrete components (such as capacitor s, resistor s, and inductor s ) can be inserted into the remaining free holes to complete the circuit. Where ICs are not used, discrete components and connecting wires may use any of the holes. Typically the spring clips are rated for 1 ampere at 5 volt s and 0.333 amperes at 15 volts (5 watt s ). [ Bus and terminal strips ] Logical 4-bits adder where sums are linked to LEDs on a typical &apos;&apos;&apos;breadboard&apos;&apos;&apos;. { binding post s depicted at the top. } { oscilloscope } { probe. The solderless breadboard is mounted on a blue painted metal sheet. Red and black binding posts are present. The black one partly obscured by the oscilloscope probe. } Solderless breadboards are available from several different manufacturers, but most share a similar layout. The layout of a typical solderless breadboard is made up from two types of areas, called strips. Strips consist of interconnected electrical terminals. Terminal strips The main areas, to hold most of the electronic components. [ need citation for the purpose of the notch being cooling December 2009 ] In the middle of a terminal strip of a breadboard, one typically finds a notch running in parallel to the long side. The notch is to mark the centerline of the terminal strip and provides limited airflow (cooling) to DIP ICs straddling the centerline. The clips on the right and left of the notch are each connected in a radial way; typically five clips (i.e., beneath five holes) in a row on each side of the notch are electrically connected. The five clip columns on the left of the notch are often marked as A, B, C, D, and E, while the ones on the right are marked F, G, H, I and J. When a &quot; skinny &quot; Dual In-line Pin package (DIP) integrated circuit (such as a typical DIP-14 or DIP-16, which have a 0.3 inch separation between the pin rows) is plugged into a breadboard, the pins of one side of the chip are supposed to go into column E while the pins of the other side go into column F on the other side of the notch. Bus strips To provide power to the electronic components. A bus strip usually contains two columns: one for ground and one for a supply voltage. However, some breadboards only provide a single-column power distributions bus strip on each long side. Typically the column intended for a supply voltage is marked in red, while the column for ground is marked in blue or black. Some manufacturers connect all terminals in a column. Others just connect groups of, for example, 25 consecutive terminals in a column. The latter design provides a circuit designer with some more control over crosstalk (inductively coupled noise) on the power supply bus. Often the groups in a bus strip are indicated by gaps in the color marking. Bus strips typically run down one or both sides of a terminal strip or between terminal strips. On large breadboards additional bus strips can often be found on the top and bottom of terminal strips. Some manufacturers provide separate bus and terminal strips. Others just provide breadboard blocks which contain both in one block. Often breadboard strips or blocks of one brand can be clipped together to make a larger breadboard. In a more robust variant, one or more breadboard strips are mounted on a sheet of metal. Typically, that backing sheet also holds a number of binding post s. These posts provide a clean way to connect an external power supply. This type of breadboard may be slightly easier to handle. Several images in this article show such solderless breadboards. [ Diagram ] A &quot; full size &quot; terminal breadboard strip typically consists of around 56 to 65 rows of connectors, each row containing the above mentioned two sets of connected clips (A to E and F to J). Together with bus strips on each side this makes up a typical 784 to 910 tie point solderless breadboard. &quot; Small size &quot; strips typically come with around 30 rows. Miniature solderless breadboards as small as 17 rows (no bus strips, 170 tie points) can be found, but these are less well suited for practical use. [ Jump wires ] Jump wires for solderless breadboarding can be obtained in ready-to-use jump wire sets or can be manually manufactured. The latter can become tedious work for larger circuits. Ready-to-use jump wires come in different qualities, some even with tiny plugs attached to the wire ends. Jump wire material for ready-made or homemade wires should usually be 22 AWG (0.33  mm²) solid copper, tin-plated wire - assuming no tiny plugs are to be attached to the wire ends. The wire ends should be stripped 3/16 &quot; to 5/16 &quot; (approx. 5  mm to 8  mm). Shorter stripped wires might result in bad contact with the board&apos;s spring clips (insulation being caught in the springs). Longer stripped wires increase the likelihood of short-circuits on the board. Needle-nose pliers and tweezers are helpful when inserting or removing wires, particularly on crowded boards. Differently colored wires and color coding discipline are often adhered to for consistency. However, the number of available colors is typically far fewer than the number of signal types or paths. Typically, a few wire colors are reserved for the supply voltages and ground (e.g., red, blue, black), some are reserved for main signals, and the rest are simply used where convenient. Some ready-to-use jump wire sets use the color to indicate the length of the wires, but these sets do not allow a meaningful color-coding schema. [ Inside a breadboard: construction ] The following images show the inside of a bus strip. inside breadboard 1 inside breadboard 2 inside breadboard 3 inside breadboard 4 inside breadboard 5 inside breadboard 6 [ Advanced solderless breadboards ] Some manufacturers provide high-end versions of solderless breadboards. These are typically high-quality breadboard modules mounted on a flat casing. The casing contains additional equipment for breadboarding, such as a power supply, one or more signal generator s, serial interface s, LED or LCD modules, and logic probes. { Powered breadboard } Solderless breadboard modules can also be found mounted on devices like microcontroller evaluation boards. They provide an easy way to add additional periphery circuits to the evaluation board. [ High frequencies and dead bugs ] For high-frequency development a metal breadboard affords a desirable solderable ground plane, often an unetched piece of printed circuit board; integrated circuits are sometimes stuck upside down to the breadboard and soldered to directly, a techniques sometimes called &quot; dead bug &quot; construction because of its appearance. Examples of dead bug with ground plane construction are illustrated in a Linear Technologies application note { Linear technologies AN47. Dead-bug breadboards with ground plane, and other prototyping techniques, illustrated in Figures F1 to F24, from p.AN47-98. There is information on breadboarding on pages AN47-26 to AN47-29. }. [ Limitations ] { Intel 8088 single board computer. } Due to large stray capacitance (from 2-25  pF per contact point), high inductance of some connections and a relatively high and not very reproducible contact resistance, solderless breadboards are limited to operation at relatively low frequencies, usually less than 10   MHz, depending on the nature of the circuit. The relative high contact resistance can already be a problem for DC and very low frequency circuits. Solderless breadboards are further limited by their voltage and current ratings. Solderless breadboards usually cannot accommodate surface-mount technology devices (SMD) or components with grid spacing other than 0.1 &quot; (2.54  mm). Further, they cannot accommodate components with multiple rows of connectors if these connectors don&apos;t match the dual in-line layout —it is impossible to provide the correct electrical connectivity. Sometimes small PCB adapters called breakout adapters can be used to fit the component to the board. Such adapters carry one or more components and have 0.1 &quot; (2.54  mm) connectors in a single in-line or dual in-line layout. Larger components are usually plugged into a socket on the adapter, while smaller components (e.g., SMD resistors) are usually soldered directly onto the adapter. The adapter is then plugged into the breadboard via the 0.1 &quot; connectors. However, the need to solder the components onto the adapter negates some of the advantage of using a solderless breadboard. Complex circuits can become unmanageable on a breadboard due to the large amount of wiring required. [ Alternatives ] Alternative methods to create prototypes are point-to-point construction, reminiscent of the original breadboards, wire wrap, wiring pencil, and boards like the stripboard. Complicated systems, such as modern computers comprising millions of transistor s, diode s, and resistor s, do not lend themselves to prototyping using breadboards, as their complex designs can be difficult to lay out and debug on a breadboard. Modern circuit designs are generally developed using a schematic capture and simulation system, and tested in software simulation before the first prototype circuits are built on a printed circuit board. Integrated circuit designs are a more extreme version of the same process: since producing prototype silicon is costly, extensive software simulations are performed before fabricating the first prototypes. However, prototyping techniques are still used for some applications such as RF circuits, or where software models of components are inexact or incomplete. [ See also ] Brassboard Fahnestock clip Iterative design Perfboard Stripboard Wire wrap [ References ] [ External links ] [ Breadboard ] NorDevX Breadboards Atwater Kent Breadboard Receivers Large parallel processing design prototyped on 50 connected breadboards Category:Electronic design Category:Electronic test equipment Category:Electronics work tools bn:ব্রেডবোর্ড bar:Steckplatin ca:Placa de proves cs:Nepájivé pole de:Steckplatine et:Makettplaat es:Placa de pruebas fa:تخته مدار fr:Platine Labdec ko:브레드보드 it:Breadboard lt:Bandomoji lenta nl:Breadboard ja:ブレッドボード pl:Płytka prototypowa pt:Protoboard ru:Макетная плата th:โพรโทบอร์ด zh:面包板