For the earlier battle fought here, see Battle of Cynoscephalae (364 BC). [ Battle of Cynoscephalae the Second Macedonian War 300px A map showing the location of Cynoscephalae. 197 BC Thessaly Decisive Roman victory Roman Republic Aetolian League allies Macedon T. Quinctius Flamininus Philip V of Macedon about 33,400 men or about the same number as the Macedonians according to Plutarch Plutarch 25,500 men according to Plutarch Plutarch about 2,000 killed or wounded 5,000 killed, 1,000 captured ] The Battle of Cynoscephalae ( [ Μάχη των Κυνός Κεφαλών ] ) was an encounter battle fought in Thessaly in 197 BC between the Roman army, led by Titus Quinctius Flamininus, and the Antigonid dynasty of Macedon, led by Philip V. [ Prelude ] Flamininus, with his allies from the Aetolian League, was stationed at Thebes, and marched out towards Pherae in search of Philip, who was at Larisa. When Flamininus began his march to Larisa he had under his command about 32,500 to 33,400 soldiers. Besides the usual Roman troops and auxiliary units that would appear in any Roman army Flamininus&apos;s forces also included soldiers from the allied Aetolian League, light infantry from Athamania, mercenary archers from Crete, and elephant s and Numidia n cavalry from King Masinissa of Numidia. Philip had about 16,000 heavy infantry in phalanx formation, 2,000 peltast s, 5,500 light infantry from Illyria, Thrace, and Crete, and 2,000 cavalry for 25,500 troops overall. The two armies met near Pherae, and Philip&apos;s troops were defeated in a cavalry skirmish on the hills outside the city. Both sides then marched toward Scotusa in search of food, but out of sight of each other because of the hills. [ Battle ] A tactical map of the battle showing the various phases. During the march there was a heavy rainstorm, and the morning after there was a fog over the hills and fields separating both camps. Despite this, Philip resumed his march, and his troops became confused and disoriented due to heavy fog. Philip then sent a small force to take the Cynoscephalae hills (coordinates: 39º25&apos;N, 22º34&apos;E). Flamininus, still unaware of Philip&apos;s location, sent out some cavalry and light infantry to reconnoiter, which engaged Philip&apos;s troops on the hills. The battle on the hills grew fierce and Flamininus sent 500 cavalry and 2,000 infantry as reinforcements, mostly Aetolians, forcing Philip&apos;s men to withdraw further up the hill. Philip now sent more men into the melee, his Macedonian and Thessalian horse, who drove the Romans down the hill, until the Aetolian cavalry stabilized the situation. Philip, though reluctant to send his phalanx into the broken, hilly terrain eventually ordered an assault with 8,000 men when he heard of the Roman retreat. Flamininus positioned his troops on the field as well. He left his right wing in reserve, with his elephants in front, and personally led the left wing against Philip. Meanwhile Philip&apos;s phalanx had reached the summit, and after joining with their light troops and cavalry which he placed on his right wing, Philip had his phalanx charge down the hill into the oncoming legionaries. As the Roman left was slowly being driven back, Flamininus took command of his right and ordered an assault there. Philip&apos;s right wing was now on higher ground than the Roman left, and was at first successful against them. However his left wing and center- made up of another 8,000 phalangites- were still disorganized and in marching formation. They hadn&apos;t even formed the phalanx when Flamininus sent his elephants charging into them, and they routed. After breaking through, one of the Roman tribune s took twenty maniples (a smaller division of the legion) and attacked the Macedonian right wing from behind. The Macedonians were unable to reposition themselves as quickly as the Roman maniples. Now surrounded by both wings of the Roman legion, they suffered heavy casualties and fled. [ Aftermath ] After a brief pursuit, Flamininus allowed Philip to escape. According to Polybius and Livy, 5,000 Macedonians had been killed. Livy mentions that other sources claim 32,000 Macedonians were killed and even one writer who due to &quot; boundless exaggeration &quot; claims 40,000 but concludes that Polybius is the trustworthy source on this matter. { Livy 33.10 } Flamininus also took 1,000 prisoners. The Romans lost about 2,000 men. This Macedonian defeat marks the passing of imperial power from the successors of Alexander the Great to Rome. [ August 2010 ] With the later Battle of Pydna, this defeat demonstrates the superiority of the Roman legion over the Macedonian phalanx. The phalanx, though very powerful head on, was not as flexible as the Roman manipular formation. Although the peace that followed allowed Philip to keep his kingdom intact as a buffer state between other Greek states and Illyria, Flamininus proclaimed that the Greek states previously under Macedonian domination were now free. Philip also had to pay 1,000 talents of silver to Rome, disband his navy and most of his army, and send his son to Rome as a hostage. [ Literature ] N.G.L. Hammond, &quot; The Campaign and Battle of Cynoscephalae in 197 BC &quot; in Journal of Hellenic Studies 108 (1988) Polybius, Histories, Bk XVIII.19–27. [ External links ] Livius.org: Cynoscephalae [ Notes ] [ Greece ] Category:2nd-century BC conflicts Cynoscephalae Cynoscephalae Category:Battles involving Pergamon Category:197 BC Cynoscephale Category:Second Macedonian War ar:معركة كينوسكيفالاي be:Бітва пад Кінаскефаламі, -197 bg:Битка при Киноскефала ca:Batalla de Cinoscèfales cs:Bitva u Kynoskefal de:Schlacht von Kynoskephalai el:Μάχη των Κυνός Κεφαλών (197 π.Χ.) es:Batalla de Cinoscéfalos (197 a. C.) fr:Bataille de Cynoscéphales (197 av. J.-C.) id:Pertempuran Kinoskefalon it:Battaglia di Cinocefale la:Cynoscephalarum pugna nl:Cynoscephalae ja:キュノスケファライの戦い (紀元前197年) no:Slaget ved Cynoscephalae pl:Bitwa pod Kynoskefalaj (197 p.n.e.) pt:Batalha de Cinoscéfalos ru:Битва при Киноскефалах sq:Beteja e Kynoskephalai-t sr:Битка код Киноскефала sh:Bitka kod Kinoskefala fi:Kynoskefalain taistelu sv:Kynoskefalai uk:Битва при Кіноскефалах vi:Trận Cynoscephalae zh:庫諾斯克法萊戰役