[ the hamlet in Buckinghamshire, England Winchmore Hill, Buckinghamshire ] [ England Greater London London Winchmore Hill Enfield Southgate LONDON N N21 Enfield 020 TQ315945 51.6339 -0.0990 ] Winchmore Hill is a district in the Borough of Enfield, North London, in the N21 postal district. [ Location ] With the Winchmore Hill conservation area as a focal point, Winchmore Hill is a ward of Enfield borough, bounded on the east by Green Lanes (the A105 road ), Barrowell Green, Firs Lane and Fords Grove, and on the west by Grovelands Park; in the south it extends to part of Aldermans Hill, and in the north to Vicars Moor Lane and Houndsden Road. Winchmore Hill is 8.9  miles (14.3  km) north north-east of Charing Cross. Once a small village hamlet in the parish of Edmonton, Winchmore Hill now borders with Palmers Green, Southgate, Edmonton, and Grange Park. [ History ] Prior to the Roman invasion, Hertfordshire, Essex and Middlesex were occupied by the Catuvellauni tribe. It is believed that this tribe built an ancient hill fort on the mound where Bush Hill Park Golf club HQ now stands. The earliest recorded mention of Winchmore Hill is in a deed dated A.D. 1319 in which it is spelt Wynsemerhull. In Old English, &apos;merhull&apos; translates according to the Concise Oxford Dictionary of English Place Names as &apos;boundary hill&apos;. It might be speculated that the overall title could mean &apos;Wynsige&apos;s boundary hill&apos;. By 1395 the name had been altered to Wynsmerhull and by 1565 the village was known as Wynsmorehyll, becoming Winchmore Hill by the time it was mentioned in state papers in 1586. There are many buildings of historical note in Winchmore Hill, including St Paul&apos;s Church, which was built as a Waterloo church on land donated from the Grovelands estate. The church ceiling was said to be the largest unsupported expanse of plasterwork in Europe until its renovation in the 1960s introduced concealed supports. The original wooden clapboard St Paul&apos;s School building can be seen a little further down Church Hill. The remains of the second brick and stone, school building are evident in the walls of the church car park. The current 1960s building is on Ringwood Way, off Station Road. Other historical buildings may be seen on Wades Hill, leading north from The Green. On your right, just beyond the shops, are some wooden clapboard cottages; beyond these on the left is a tall five-storey residential building dating back to 1710. This is in the style of the Georgian town houses of London&apos;s West End, but stands alone. It once had a partner house to its right, which was demolished by its owners, Keble School (in the days before such buildings were &apos;listed&apos;). Keble School has in recent years re-erected a similar-style building on the site here. The oldest pub in the district is probably the Green Dragon - on Green Lanes. It is reputed to have opened in 1726 on the junction of Green Lanes and Green Dragon Lane. The Victoria County History reveals that by 1752 The Green Dragon was established, although not in it present form. At that time, highwaymen were hanged near to where they were caught, and it is said that one was caught and executed on a gallows erected by the Green Dragon&apos;s front entrance. These gallows were not pulled down for a number of years, which might have prompted the owner to move the pub to its current location at the bottom of Vicars Moor Lane near the end of the 18th century. The original Green Dragon was pulled down in 1892 and the new one was extensively remodelled in 1935. The Woodman pub near the end of Broadwalk is reported to have been built in 1727, although there is also evidence to suggest that it dates from 1820. Before the building obtained a pub licence in 1868, it was a private residence. Woodside House and Rowantree House on The Green at the end of Broadwalk were built in 1750 and of painted brick. Numerous local buildings that were constructed between 1770 and 1839 remain today. Near the Dog and Duck on Hoppers Road are some old terraced houses built around 1770. Number 106A Vicars Moor Lane is a distinctive private residence that retains the facade of a chapel. To the east on the same road are a number of residences that were probably built around the late 18th or early 19th century. The station c.1875. In 1865 the Great Northern Railway obtained permission to build a new line to run from Wood Green to Hertford through Palmers Green and Enfield. However, in 1869 financial constraints forced the company to consider Enfield as the most northern terminus. Palmers Green and Winchmore Hill were to be the intervening rural stations. The intention was to finish the line to Enfield by 1870, but the terrain was more troublesome than expected and five men met their death while laying the track. The branch opened on All-Fools Day 1871 and the first passenger train came through Winchmore Hill, creating a new suburb of London town. At first only 16 trains a day left Enfield, mostly for Moorgate. An electric tramway along Green Lanes from Palmers Green was developed in 1907, helping to further develop the area. The tramway is now long gone, but the wide road remains and the 329 bus follows the tram route from Enfield to Turnpike Lane. The Capitol Cinema, designed in the Art Deco style by Robert Cromie, was opened on 29 December 1929 in Green Lanes, on a site now occupied by the office block Capitol House. Briefly run by Lou Morris, the cinema was taken over in December 1930 by ABC Cinemas who ran it until its closure on 5 December 1959. It was demolished the following year. [ Winchmore Hill today ] At the heart of the area is Winchmore Hill Green, a village green surrounded by shops and restaurants. Of particular note in Winchmore Hill is Grovelands Park which was originally a private estate before being partly sold off to the council in 1913. The part remaining in private hands now contains the Priory Clinic, which hosted General Pinochet whilst he was in the UK awaiting charges from the Spanish government. Winchmore Hill is located in the Parliamentary constituency of Enfield Southgate. It is held by some that, in the 1997 General Election, the incumbent Member of Parliament Michael Portillo lost his seat in part due to the proposal to build a McDonald&apos;s restaurant in Green Lanes on the site of the former Century House Conservative club, behind residences in Elm Park Road. The restaurant was never built, but the site is now occupied by a block of modern apartments next to a Tesco Express store and ESSO service station. At the 2001 census, Winchmore Hill had 12,225 residents in 4,976 households. 80% of residences were owned by their occupiers. The population was in general rather more elderly than in the rest of Enfield - 38.3% being 45 or over, compared with 35.3% for the borough as a whole. [ Schools ] [ Primary ] St. Paul&apos;s School Grange Park Primary School Highfield Primary School Eversley Primary School [ Secondary ] Highlands School Keble Preparatory School Winchmore School Palmers Green High School Ashmole School [ Railway connections ] First Capital Connect provide services on the electrified railway line which runs from Hertford North through Winchmore Hill station into London. This line connects further south to the tube system at Finsbury Park, Highbury and Islington, Old Street and Moorgate, where it terminates. After 22:00 trains run directly to King&apos;s Cross from Finsbury Park, rather than stations to Moorgate (the last train back leaves Moorgate at 21:50). (Timings from 2008 timetable). The nearest London Underground station is at Southgate which is on the Piccadilly Line. [ Nearby places ] Southgate Grange Park Palmers Green Enfield Chase Cockfosters Edmonton Oakwood Enfield Town [ Famous residents ] [ January 2010 ] [ Arts ] Cliff Richard, singer, lived on Colne Road Rod Stewart, singer and former frontman with The Faces, lived on Broad Walk Paul Young, singer, lives in a property on The Green Jake Hook, songwriter for The Soldiers and producer lives off Green Lanes Keith Moon, drummer with The Who, lived on Old Park Ridings Bob Henrit, drummer with The Kinks, lives off The Green Ted Ray, actor, lived on Broad Walk Alfredo Campoli, violinist, lived on Eversley Park Road Matthew Garber, actor, lived on Vicars Moor Lane Myleene Klass, Singer &amp; classical musician lived on Old Park Ridings Melanie Sykes, television personality lives on Broad Walk Frank Ifield, singer, lived in Broad Walk Rachel Stevens, singer &amp; model Sir Roy Strong, art historian was born in Winchmore Hill Natalie Cassidy, television personality lives off The Green Stavros Flatley, finalists on Britains Got Talent, live on Bazile Road Stephen Mangan, Actor, starred in BBC 2&apos;s &apos; Episodes &apos; alongside Matt LeBlanc Alexander Parsonage, Theatre Director, lives off Green Lanes [ Sports ] Cesc Fàbregas, Captain of Arsenal Football Club, lives on Broad Walk Jamie Redknapp Football player, and Louise Redknapp, singer/presenter, lived on Broad Walk Kenneth Friar, director of Arsenal Football Club lives on Broad Walk Frank McLintock, 1971 Arsenal Football Club double winning captain, lives at Seaforth Garden Richard Hill, England Rugby World Cup winning flanker Jo Durie, Tennis player, lives on Wilson Street Frank Mann, England cricketer Joe Hulme, Arsenal footballer of the interwar years, lived there at the time of his death in September 1991 at the age of 87 [ Other ] Sir Roy Strong, lived here when young Leslie Smith, co-founder of Matchbox Toys, in Broad Walk Ross and Norris McWhirter, founder editors of the Guinness Book of Records Valerie Susan Holmes, beauty queen, lived on Oakwood Crescent in her youth LJK Setright, motoring journalist, who attended Winchmore School in Highfield Road during World War II James Caan (entrepreneur), entrepreneur, lived in Broad Walk [ In the arts ] Argentinian-born composer Juan María Solare wrote in 2001 a piano piece called Winchmore Hill, dedicated to James MacAonghus (who lives in Winchmore Hill). Premiere by Dorota Niziol in Stuttgart on 28 September 2002, with a choreography by Diana-Maria Sagvosdkina (Studio für BewegungsChiffren) within the frame of the Kulturmarkt Stuttgart. &apos;&apos;Winchmore Hill&apos;&apos;. Retrieved 12 September 2010. [ See also ] St Paul&apos;s Primary School St Paul&apos;s Church Winchmore Hill The Northern Convalescent Fever Hospital, Winchmore Hill Southgate Cricket Club Winchmore Hill Cricket Club Enfield Borough Police History [ Bibliography ] The Cresswells of Winchmore Hill by Peter Hodge; A History of Winchmore Hill by S. Delvin; Winchmore Hill: Memories of a Lost Village, Cresswell, Henrietta; Memories of Winchmore Hill, Horace G Regnart; Fond Memories of Winchmore Hill, Alan Dumayne; A Look at Old Winchmore Hill, Stuart Devlin; Southgate and Winchmore Hill: A Short History, David Pam; Dr Cresswell&apos;s Winchmore Hill published by the London Borough of Enfield Libraries [ References ] [ External links ] Winchmore Hill statistics, including map (PDF document, London borough of Enfield, 2004) Winchmore Hill Residents Association Website Category:Districts of London Category:Districts of Enfield nl:Winchmore Hill