[ electrical power transmission grids and distribution networks Grid (electricity) ] { Ohm&apos;s Law. } [ January 2007 ] An electrical network is an interconnection of electrical element s such as resistor s, inductor s, capacitor s, transmission line s, voltage source s, current source s and switch es. An electrical circuit is a special type of network, one that has a closed loop giving a return path for the current. Electrical networks that consist only of sources (voltage or current), linear lumped elements (resistors, capacitors, inductors), and linear distributed elements (transmission lines) can be analyzed by algebraic and transform methods to determine DC response, AC response, and transient response. A resistive circuit is a circuit containing only resistors and ideal current and voltage sources. Analysis of resistive circuits is less complicated than analysis of circuits containing capacitors and inductors. If the sources are constant ( DC ) sources, the result is a DC circuit. A network that contains active electronic components is known as an electronic circuit. Such networks are generally nonlinear and require more complex design and analysis tools. [ Classification ] [ By passivity ] An active network is a network that consists of at least one active source like a voltage source or current source A passive network is a network which does not contain any active device. [ By linearity ] A linear circuit is a circuit which is composed entirely of independent sources, linear dependentsources and linear passive elements or a combination of these. Otherwise it is called as non-linear network. [ Classification of sources ] Sources can be classified as independent sources and dependent sources [ Independent Sources ] Ideal Independent Source maintains same voltage or current regardless of the other elements present in the circuit.Its value is either constant (DC) or sinusoidal (AC). [ Dependent Sources ] Dependent Sources depend upon a particular element of the circuit for delivering the power or voltage or current depending upon the type of source it is. [ Electrical laws ] A number of electrical laws apply to all electrical networks. These include: Kirchhoff&apos;s current law : The sum of all currents entering a node is equal to the sum of all currents leaving the node. Kirchhoff&apos;s voltage law : The directed sum of the electrical potential differences around a loop must be zero. Ohm&apos;s law : The voltage across a resistor is equal to the product of the resistance and the current flowing through it. Norton&apos;s theorem : Any network of voltage or current sources and resistors is electrically equivalent to an ideal current source in parallel with a single resistor. Thévenin&apos;s theorem : Any network of voltage or current sources and resistors is electrically equivalent to a single voltage source in series with a single resistor. [ Design methods ] To design any electrical circuit, either analog or digital, electrical engineers need to be able to predict the voltages and currents at all places within the circuit. Linear circuit s, that is, circuits with the same input and output frequency, can be analyzed by hand using complex number theory. Other circuits can only be analyzed with specialized software program s or estimation techniques such as the piecewise-linear model. Circuit simulation software, such as HSPICE, and languages such as VHDL-AMS and verilog-AMS allow engineers to design circuits without the time, cost and risk of error involved in building circuit prototypes. See also Network analysis (electrical circuits). Other more complex laws may be needed if the network contains nonlinear or reactive components. Non-linear self-regenerative heterodyning systems can be approximated. Applying these laws results in a set of simultaneous equations that can be solved either algebraically or numerically. [ Network simulation software ] More complex circuits can be analyzed numerically with software such as SPICE or GNUCAP, or symbolically using software such as SapWin. [ Linearization around operating point ] When faced with a new circuit, the software first tries to find a steady state solution, that is, one where all nodes conform to Kirchhoff&apos;s Current Law and the voltages across and through each element of the circuit conform to the voltage/current equations governing that element. Once the steady state solution is found, the operating points of each element in the circuit are known. For a small signal analysis, every non-linear element can be linearized around its operation point to obtain the small-signal estimate of the voltages and currents. This is an application of Ohm&apos;s Law. The resulting linear circuit matrix can be solved with Gaussian elimination. [ Piecewise-linear approximation ] Software such as the PLECS interface to Simulink uses piecewise-linear approximation of the equations governing the elements of a circuit. The circuit is treated as a completely linear network of ideal diode s. Every time a diode switches from on to off or vice versa, the configuration of the linear network changes. Adding more detail to the approximation of equations increases the accuracy of the simulation, but also increases its running time. [ See also ] [ Circuit diagrams electric circuits ] [ Electronics ] [ electrical circuit ] [ 20em ] Alternating current Bridge circuit Digital circuit Circuit diagram Circuit theory Diode bridge Direct current Quiescent current Ground (electricity) Hydraulic analogy Impedance Load Mathematical methods in electronics Memristor Netlist Network analyzer (electrical) Network analysis (electrical circuits) Open-circuit voltage RC circuit LC circuit RLC circuit Lumped and distributed element model Potential divider Prototype filter Schematic Series and parallel circuits Short circuit Superposition theorem SPICE Topology (electronics) Continuity test Voltage drop Mesh analysis Category:Electronic circuits Category:Electronic engineering Category:Electrical engineering am:ኤሌክትሪክ ዑደት ar:دائرة كهربائية bn:তড়িৎ বর্তনী be:Электрычны ланцуг bg:Електрическа верига bs:Električne mreže ca:Circuit elèctric cs:Elektrický obvod da:Elektronisk kredsløb de:Elektrische Schaltung el:Ηλεκτρικό κύκλωμα es:Circuito eo:Elektra cirkvito eu:Zirkuitu elektriko fa:مدار الکتریکی fr:Circuit électrique ko:전기 회로 hi:विद्युत परिपथ hr:Električne mreže id:Sirkuit listrik it:Circuito elettrico he:מעגל חשמלי ht:Sikui elektrik la:Circuitus electricus lt:Elektrinė grandinė hu:Áramkör mk:Струјно коло ms:Litar elektrik mn:Цахилгаан хэлхээ nl:Elektrisch netwerk ja:電気回路 no:Elektronisk krets nn:Elektrisk krins pl:Obwód elektryczny pt:Circuito elétrico ro:Circuit electric qu:Pinchikilla muyu rue:Електрічный обвод ru:Электрическая цепь simple:Electrical circuit sk:Elektrický obvod sl:Električni krog sr:Електрична кола fi:Virtapiiri sv:Elektrisk krets ta:மின்சுற்று th:วงจรไฟฟ้า tr:Elektrik devresi uk:Електричне коло ur:برقی دوران vi:Mạch điện wo:Ndombo gu mbëj zh:电路