[ Sekhmet.svg thumb Sekhmet with head of lioness and a solar disk and uraeus on her head S42-Aa1:t-B1 Sekhmet Goddess of warfare, pestilence, the desert and destruction Memphis, Leontopolis Sun disk, red linen Ra Presumably Hathor, Bast, Serket, Shu and Tefnut Ptah Nefertem and Maahes ] In Egyptian mythology, Sekhmet (also spelled Sachmet, Sakmet, Sakhet, Sekmet, Sakhmet and Sekhet; and given the Greek name, Sachmis) was originally the warrior goddess as well as goddess of healing for Upper Egypt. She is depicted as a lion ess, the fiercest hunter known to the Egyptians. It was said that her breath created the desert. She was seen as the protector of the pharaoh s and led them in warfare. Her cult was so dominant in the culture that when the first pharaoh of the twelfth dynasty, Amenemhat I, moved the capital of Egypt to Itjtawy, the centre for her cult was moved as well. Religion, the royal lineage, and the authority to govern were intrinsically interwoven in Ancient Egypt during its approximately three thousand years of existence. Sekhmet also is a solar deity, sometimes called the daughter of the sun god Ra and often associated with the goddesses Hathor and Bast. She bears the solar disk and the Uraeus which associates her with Wadjet and royalty. With these associations she can be construed as being a divine arbiter of the goddess Ma&apos;at (Justice, or Order) in the Judgment Hall of Osiris, associating her with the Wedjat (later the Eye of Ra ), and connecting her with Tefnut as well. [ Etymology ] Sekhmet&apos;s name comes from the Ancient Egyptian word &quot; sekhem &quot; which means &quot; powerful one. &quot; Sekhmet&apos;s name suits her function and means, the (one who is) powerful. She also was given titles such as the (One) Before Whom Evil Trembles, the Mistress of Dread, Lady of Slaughter and She Who Mauls. [ History ] { temple of Mut at Luxor, granite, 1403–1365 BC, in the National Museum, } { Copenhagen } { Wadjet as the } { cobra and the goddess } { Nekhbet as the white } { vulture, symbols of lower and upper Egypt respectively who always were depicted on the crown of Egypt and referred to as the } { two ladies, and the supplicant holds a complete } { menat and a } { sistrum for the ritual, circa 870 B.C. ( } { Berlin, Altes Museum, catalogue number 23733) } In order to placate Sekhmet&apos;s wrath, her priestesses performed a ritual before a different statue of the goddess on each day of the year. This practice resulted in many images of the goddess being preserved. Most of her statuettes were rigidly crafted and do not exhibit any expression of movements or dynamism; this design was made to make them last a long time rather than to express any form of functions or actions she is associated with. It is estimated that more than seven hundred statues of Sekhmet once stood in one funerary temple alone, that of Amenhotep III, on the west bank of the Nile. She was envisioned as a fierce lioness, and in art, was depicted as such, or as a woman with the head of a lioness, who was dressed in red, the colour of blood. Sometimes the dress she wears exhibits a rosetta pattern over each breast, an ancient leonine motif, which can be traced to observation of the shoulder-knot hairs on lions. Occasionally, Sekhmet was also portrayed in her statuettes and engravings with minimal clothing or naked. Tame lions were kept in temples dedicated to Sekhmet at Leontopolis. [ Festivals and evolution ] The warrior goddess Sekhmet, shown with her sun disk and cobra crown To pacify Sekhmet, festivals were celebrated at the end of battle, so that the destruction would come to an end. During an annual festival held at the beginning of the year, a festival of intoxication, the Egyptians danced and played music to soothe the wildness of the goddess and drank great quantities of wine ritually to imitate the extreme drunkenness that stopped the wrath of the goddess—when she almost destroyed humankind. This may relate to averting excessive flooding during the inundation at the beginning of each year as well, when the Nile ran blood-red with the silt from upstream and Sekhmet had to swallow the overflow to save humankind. In 2006, Betsy Bryan, an archaeologist with Johns Hopkins University excavating at the temple of Mut presented her findings about the festival that included illustrations of the priestesses being served to excess and its adverse effects being ministered to by temple attendants. { &quot; Sex and booze figured in Egyptian rites &quot;, archaeologists find evidence for ancient version of ‘Girls Gone Wild’. From } { MSNBC, Oct 30, 2006 } Participation in the festival was great, including the priestesses and the population. Historical records of tens of thousands attending the festival exist. These findings were made in the temple of Mut because when Thebes rose to greater prominence, Mut absorbed some characteristics of Sekhmet. These temple excavations at Luxor discovered a &quot; porch of drunkenness &quot; built onto the temple by the Pharaoh Hatshepsut, during the height of her twenty year reign. In a later myth developed around an annual drunken Sekhmet festival, Ra, the sun god, created her from a fiery eye gained from his mother, Hathor (daughter of Ra), to destroy mortals who conspired against him (Lower Egypt). In the myth, Sekhmet&apos;s blood-lust was not quelled at the end of battle and led to her destroying almost all of humanity, so Ra had tricked her by turning the Nile as red as blood (the Nile turns red every year when filled with silt during inundation) so that Sekhmet would drink it. The trick was, however, that the red liquid was not blood, but wine so that it resembled blood, making her so drunk that she gave up slaughter and became an aspect of the gentle Hathor to some moderns. It is said that when Sekhment awoke from her drunken sleep, the first thing she laid eyes on was the creator god, Ptah and fell in love with him, and the result was Mahees and Nefertem. Sekhmet later was considered to be the mother of Maahes, a deity who appeared during the New Kingdom period. He was seen as a lion prince, the son of the goddess. The late origin of Maahes in the Egyptian pantheon may be the incorporation of a Nubian deity of ancient origin in that culture, arriving during trade and warfare or even, during a period of domination by Nubia. During the Greek dominance in Egypt, note was made of a temple for Maahes that was an auxiliary facility to a large temple to Sekhmet at Taremu in the delta region (likely a temple for Bast originally), a city which the Greeks called Leontopolis, where by that time, an enclosure was provided to house lions. [ In popular culture ] Sekhmet appears in Akhet, the first in a trilogy of novels by H.L. Reasby. Called the &quot; Sekhmet&apos;s Light Trilogy &quot;, the series tells of Dr. Nicole Salem and how she becomes the avatar of Sekhmet, gifted with superhuman abilities so that she can combat the forces of Apep in the mortal world. Sekhmet is referenced in the album The Circus by The Venetia Fair. Sekhmet is the lion. Death metal band Nile referenced Sekhmet in the title track of their album &quot; Ithyphallic &quot;, and in &quot; The Eye Of Ra &quot; on their album Those Whom the Gods Detest. Death metal band Behemoth referenced Sekhmet in the song &quot; Christgrinding Avenue &quot; on their album The Apostasy. Sekhmet is used in The 39 Clues book Beyond the Grave and is the reason why the characters travel to Cairo. Sekhmet is also featured in The Red Pyramid written by Rick Riordan as a minor antagonist. Sekhmet is the subject of &quot; Lionheart &quot; a song about the goddess by the symphonic power metal band, Amberian Dawn from their The Clouds of Northland Thunder album. Sekhmet is also mentioned in Stargate SG-1. A young girl Anna is created by a German doctor, who is son of a Nazi. Sam, Daniel and Teal&apos;c find artifacts belonging the Goa&apos;uld Sekhmet. In Tutenstein, an animated TV series about Ancient Egypt, Sekhmet is featured in one of the episodes. She goes on a rampage in the museum and the building site to make people build a pyramid for Tut. The space vessel &quot; Sekhmet &quot; is a level in the video game Jet Force Gemini, a third person shooter developed by Rare in 1999. Sekhmet is also a the name of an Aragami in the PlayStation Portable game, God Eater. In the BBC TV series Sherlock episode &quot; The Great Game &quot;, John Watson believes a cat named Sekhmet is responsible for the death of her owner. [ See also ] Lion and Sun#Other (non-Iranian) variants [ References ] [ External links ] [ Sekhmet Sekhmet ] Ancient Egypt: the Mythology - Sekhmet Temple of Sekhmet, in Cactus Springs, Nevada &quot; Ancient war goddess statues unearthed in Egypt &quot;, archaeologists unearth six statues of the lion-headed war goddess Sekhmet in temple of pharaoh Amenhotep III. 2006-03-06 [ collapsed ] Category:Animal goddesses Category:Destroyer goddesses Category:Egyptian goddesses Category:Health goddesses Category:War goddesses Category:Mythological felines { als:Sachmet } ar:سخمت bg:Сехмет ca:Sekhmet cs:Sachmet da:Sekhmet de:Sachmet et:Sehmet es:Sejmet eo:Seĥmeta eu:Sekhmet fr:Sekhmet ko:세크메트 hr:Sekhmet id:Sekhmet it:Sekhmet ka:სეხმეტი la:Sachmis lt:Sekhmeta hu:Szahmet mk:Секхмет nl:Sekhmet ja:セクメト no:Sekhmet oc:Sekhmet pl:Sechmet pt:Sekhmet ro:Sekhmet ru:Сехмет simple:Sekhmet sk:Sechmet sh:Sekmet fi:Sekhmet sv:Sekhmet tr:Sekhmet uk:Сехмет zh:賽克邁特